Man as Extension

Nineteenth-century naturalists suggested that mammals were divided into two groups—man and all other mammals; they also thought that birds should be divided into two groups—bowerbirds and all other birds. These categorizations resulted from the observation that both man and the bowerbird have elaborated their extensions and in so doing have greatly accelerated their evolution. The bowerbird occupies the jungles and thickets of New Guinea and northern Australia and, as its name implies, builds a bower with which to attract and woo its mate. The elaborate bower, constructed of twigs and grass, is decorated with shells, iridescent skeletons of insects, seeds, clay balls, charcoal, pebbles, and brightly colored objects including freshly picked flowers. Actually, the bower and its decoration is not only an extension of once brilliant plumage but also of courtship displays as well. As Gilliard1 states, "… these objects have in effect become externalized bundles of secondary sexual characteristics that are psychologically but not physically connected with the males" (italics sdded). Behind the bower lie some radical organization and behavior. The bowerbirds belong to a group of birds who no longer pair off (pairbonding) with the opposite sex to mate, nest, and raise the young. Instead, males gather in clans (separate from the females) in which they rank themselves hierarehically. In the spring, the clans are formed around "arenas" in which display and mating take place. Each bird has its own private display court, called a lek. Dominant birds occupy the central position in the arena and only the dominant males mate with females that visit the arena. Reminiscent of wealthy, powerful men, the birds who have colorful bowers with the most baubles are dominant in the bowerbird hierarchy.
A story of the evolution of the bowerbird is complex and subtle. What we learn from it is that once the bird begins to evolve by extension, evolution speeds up, as is the case with man. It is no longer necessary to wait for the slower forces of natural selection to work. In the case of the bowerbird, according to Gilliard it is possible to "… cross into a new adaptive zone, …"2 which is precisely what man has done, only more completely.
The evolution of the bowerbird is highly suggestive as an example of how a species, once it begins to use the environment as a tool, sets in motion a whole series of new and often unforeseen environmental transactions that require further adjustments. Until now, only short-lived organisms of very small size could evolve rapidly,3 but extensions can be evolved much faster than the body. The automobile and the airplane evolved from dreams in men's minds, through many simple and inadequate forms to the complex machines we know today.
More, much more, should be known about the whole process of extension. No other species even approaches man in the elaboration of evolution by extension. Both quantitatively and qualitatively, the gap is too great between man and other species to say much more than, when the process begins, evolution accelerates drastically; therefore, because man is unique in this regard, he can learn only from himself. Unfortunately, studies of material extension as process are rare, because all but a few early anthropologists felt there was little to be learned from material culture—one of our most readily available extension4 systems. With the exception of those interested in primitive art, the early anthropologists were academicians, facile with words but with little feeling for what material things could tell them.
Inventions and scientific break-throughs are real and have their beginnings in looking at things differently. They do not spring full-blown from Zeus's brow, but evolve slowly from very fragile and imperfect events. Let's take a look at the extension process,4 keeping in mind that what we are examining is one of several ways of meeting environmental challenges.
No organism can survive without altering its environment in some way, if merely to reorganize the chemicals in its immediate vicinity. Altering the environment can be broken down into two complementary processes, externalizing and internalizing, which are ubiquitous, continuous, and normal. In man, these processes can be adaptive mechanisms as well as controls. Which one of the two processes is used has important consequences for everything that follows. For instance, the conscience is a good example of an internalized control on which much of Western society depends. If the conscience does not function, we have what is known as a psychopath, dangerous to everyone. However, actions that are under the control of what we call the conscience in one part of the world may be handled by externalined controls elsewhere. The reason a given set of controls is internalized in one culture snd externalized in another has not been studied. The difference, however, can be observed even in closely related cultures. For example, in the northern European tradition until very recently, sexual controls were vested in the woman for the most part; i.e., internalized. In southern Europe this was not so. The controls were in the situation—people—and in physical structures—doors and locks. For years, people in middle and upperclass Latin America believed that the sexual drive was so strong in men and the capacity of women to resist was so weak, that if a man and a woman were alone together behind closed doors neither could be expected to be able to resist the overwhelming power of the man's drive. Walls, doors, and locks were a physical extension of morality—externalizations of processes handled internally by middle-class North Americans.
It is also paradoxical that extensional systems—so flexible at first—frequently become quite rigid and difficult to change. Confusion between the extension and the processes that have been extended can explain some but not all of this rigidity. Older readers may remember when English teachers tried to convince them that the real language was the written language, of which the spoken language was merely a watered-down, adulterated version. Actually, the spoken language is the primary extension. The written language is a second-generation extension. The spoken language is a symbolization of something that happened, could have happened, or is in the process of happening, while the written language is a symbolization of the spoken language The fact that the written language is a symbolization of a symbolization does not mean that the writing system is not something in its own right, just as mathematics is a system in its own right, independent of computations in the head.
Extension transference (ET) is the term I have given to this common intellectual maneuver in which the extension is confused with or takes the place of the process extended. The ET factor, and the stresses it engenders both actual and conceptual, have occupied some of the most brilliant minds in Western culture. James Joyce,5 for example, dedicated his life to trying to close the gap between the two systems. In Finnegans Wake, Joyce portrays in writing the workings of the verbal parts of the brain. Many of Picasso's paintings and Moore's sculptures provide visual as well as tactile analogues of Joyce, i.e., externalizations of the visual processes of the brain. If Picasso and Moore had not been brilliant and insightful and had not set their sights on piercing the ET screen—if there had not been something there that was real—they would have been treated as cranks instead of as geniuses. Extension transference takes many forms and can be dealt with in many ways. Alfred Korzybski and Wendell Johnson,6 founders of semantics, identified the ET factor in the use of words and published extensively on the profound effects of mistaking the symbol for the thing symbolized while endowing the symbol with properties it does not possess. Worshiping idols, common to all cultures, represents one of the earlit examples of the ET factor. In the Bible, we see this when men are directed to give up the worship of "graven images."
Extensions often permit man to solve problems in satisfactory ways, to evolve and adapt at great speed without changing the basic structure of his body.7 However, the extension does something else: it permits man to examine and perfect what is inside the head. Once something is externalized, it is possible to look at it, study it, change it, perfect it, and at the same time learn important thing about oneself. The full implications of the extension as lesson and the extension as mirror have yet to be fully realized.
The extension can also serve as a form of prosthesis when something happens to the processes that lie behind the extension. The Russian scientist Luria8 probably has as deep an understanding of the marvels and complexities of the human brain as any man alive. Luria's genius lies in his ability to recognize the significance of what might otherwise be taken as trivial. His experiments and tests of loss of brain function are so clear, direct, and simple, they can be understood by children; yet somehow he manages to put everything together in such a way that the whole can be grasped. The relationship of brain to extension is the central issue of the processes described in this chapter, and we are fortunate enough to have one of Luria's cases to illustrate the extension as prosthesis. In The Man with Shattered World,9 Luria has collected and commented on the writings of a Russian engineer, named Zasetsky, whose brain was shattered by a German bullet in World War II. Zasetsky's frontal lobe was left intact, which gave him the will to overcome—in the course of twenty-five years—some of the dreadful damage he had suffered. When the bullet struck, it wiped out the past, the brain's ability to organize sensory perceptions into meaningful wholes, the ability to analyze the feedback systems that told him what his extremities were doing, middle and long-term memory, the logic of grammar, and the relationship of words to their referents (the actual objects referred to). To Zasetsky it was like being without a mind. Fortunately, he still had a reservoir of words and was able, with help, to begin to use them. Painfully and with great difficulty, he put sentences together. The sentences became his world, and writing his way of thinking!
Now, writing as a way of thinking is not extraordinary. Many of us, who do not carry words in our heads, think this way by translating our thoughts into written words. For Zasetsky, however, it was the only way he could think. His case simply drives home the point because there was no other way. Because the written text stands still—like a block of marble being carved by a sculptor—it is then possible to work on a thought until it takes form and can stand on its own feet and in the process tell us something about ourselves.
Descriptive linguists in the tradition of Sapir and Whorf were the first to hint at some of the newer variants on the close relationships between language and thought. Whorf,10 who was also a chemist and insurance investigator, became initially interested in language because of the frequently disastrous consequences that misuse of words had on people. "Empty" gasoline drums caused fires and explosions; instead of being empty, the drums were "full" of gasoline fumes! Whorf's greatest contribution to Western thinking lay in his meticulous descriptions of the relationship of language to events in a cross-cultural context. He demonstrated that cultures have unique ways of relating language to reality of all sorts, which can be one of man's principal sources of information concerning cultural differences. Nothing happens in the world of human beings that is not deeply influenced by linguistic forms. The Hopi, for example, who are rather pragmatic, exacting people, had difficulty understanding the mythical world of Christianity because they had no abstract, empty spaces without reference to other sensory experience. Heaven as a concept just didn't fit Hopi thought.
While few discoveries are ever really lost, Whorf, a hundred years ahead of his time, carved out an entire field, which has, sadly, been abandoned. His work, as well as that of his mentor, Edward Sapir,11 while not currently fashionable, was truly brilliant and opened up entire new vistas concerning the incredible diversity of humankind. However, in spite of their brilliance, both Wharf and Sapir apparently fell into the ET trap. That is, they believed that language was thought. In a sense, they were correct if one looks only at the incredible influence that language exerts on thought. To escape this particular trap, we must take into consideration people such as Einstein, who did not think with words,12 but in visual and even muscular terms, a topic that is discussed in Chapter 12.
A variation of the extension-transference theme is that if the ET process in second- and third-generation extensions has gone far enough, the first-generation extension is overshadowed and frequently viewed as though it had had no structure. This was discovered by Charles Ferguson, one of America's leading descriptive linguists and Arabic specialists, while he was working on an orthography and grammar for colloquial Arabic. In the Arab world, classical Arabic (which is also the written language) is sacred. Classical Arabic is almost as distinct from colloquial Arabic as French is from Latin. The educated Arabs learn classical Arabic in schools, speak it on certain formal occasions, and are ranked by how fluently and beautifully they write and speak. At other times, they use the colloquial form of the language.
The fact that there was no written colloquial language meant that children going to schools had the task of not only learning a new language but learning to read and write as well. Ferguson was working at the Foreign Service Institute of the State Department, where it was felt that at least a few U.S. personnel could benefit from being able to speak "the language of the people." Experts and Middle Eastern specialists, of course, had always been expected to learn the "prestige" language, the "real" language—classical Arabic.
Since there were no colloquial grammars, it was necessary to derive one from the living language—which is one of the things that descriptive linguists can do. Ferguson went to work. His first discovery was the common belief among Arabs that colloquial Arabic was not a language at all and that it had no structure! So how could he possibly study it? Ferguson's informants told him that it didn't really matter how one used colloquial Arabic. Nevertheless, thirty minutes with a native speaker would reveal that there were correct and incorrect ways of saying everything. The rules, though unstated, were just as binding as though set in concrete.
Labov13 et al. have described a comparable but not identical situation in regard to black English. Lower-class black children in the United States would come to school equipped with a rich and different dialect ideally suited to the multiple needs of black culture, only to be told that what they spoke was a degraded, substandard form of English.
Everywhere I have been in the world, the ET factor was discovered to be a principal source of alienation from self and heritage (the two are often synonymous). When a teacher tells a student that what he learns in school is valid and real and what he grew up with is wrong, the student may have vague misgivings and experience momentary anxiety. But what is he to do? From that moment on, there is an ever-deepening chasm that permanently separates perceived life from reality.14 The reader will undoubtedly have examples of his own to illustrate the extension-transference process.
Another frequently dysfunctional characteristic of ET systems is that they can be moved around and inappropriately applied. This is understandable, because it takes years and even lifetimes to develop a good extension system. (Sometimes we call them paradigms when they take a grammatical or rule-making or modeling form.) In the days following the opening of Japan to the outside world, American missionaries wrote their own grammars for teaching Japanese to each other. Anyone who has seen one of these early grammars knows that the missionaries projected their own lndo-European grammatical forms onto Japanese without any reference to the actual structure of the Japanese language. Nominative, genitive, dative, and ablative cases all appear in the grammars with identical Japanese words under each. A characteristic of transference phenomena is that people will treat the transferred system as the only reality and apply it indiscriminately to new situations. I once knew an American woman in Tokyo who became so resentful of the Foreign Service Institute language drill designed to reinforce the learning of proper Japanese that she simply struck out on her own. She said, "The devil with all these honorifics. I'm not going to learn them. I will simply learn vocabulary." What she spoke, of course, was a most dreadful, unintelligible mélange of Japanese words and English grammar.
Something similar has happened to significant blocks of social science. Not only has there been extension transference (not data, but methodology is thought of as the real science), but because physical science has been so successful, the paradigms of the so-called hard sciences were transferred intact to social science, where they are seldom, if ever, appropriate. Garrett Hardin, a professor of ecology at the University of California at Santa Barbara, has explained the situation in social science as a consequence of a world view borrowed from physics. He states that the physicist "… sees the world as composed of isolated atomic units with no real relations to one another …"15 except mere side-by-side juxtaposition and external bumpings. That is, the world of the physicist leads him to think linearly. This approach has been successful and is so prestigious that it is doubly seductive to other disciplines.
The ET factor in social science has also been recently and elegantly described by Martin16 and Andreski.17 Ultimately, when ET distortions become too great and the discrepancy between reality and the extension system is so evident that it can no longer be ignored, people become uncomfortable and begin to do something about it. However, the discontinuities can be horrendous before a revolution occurs.
Now popularly acclaimed, the ET process is at work in technology as well, with the result that technology has become an end in itself and is viewed as the arena of study and problem solving in today's troubled world—problem solving not by social scientists but by engineers. World problems such as food and housing are seen as technological by even such advanced thinkers as Buckminster Fuller.18 While I agree with Fuller that we should do "more with less," the story does not end there, nor is the future of Alvin Toffler19 inevitable.
Recently, people have turned away from technological solutions toward the more integrated study of the dynamics of living processes. The case of insecticides is an example. Nowadays when a pest causes too much damage, one finds biologists and ethologists beginning to look for the pest's natural enemies. Rather than killing everything in sight (as many pesticides do), scientists now try to develop a specific program that zeros in on the pest and does not leave a residue to be concentrated ten millionfold as it ascends the food chain.20
Public and private education is another example of the lengths to which ET distortions can go. Not only children but people of all ages have the capacity to learn naturally. What is more, learning can be its own reward. Like eating and sex, the drive to learn is powerful indeed. Yet the process has been distorted in the minds of the educators, who have confused what they call education with learning. The popular notion is that the schools contain the learning and their job is somehow to get the learning into the child. In the United States, the process of distortion in education has progressed to a point comparable to sex in Freud's nineteenth-century Vienna. A natural, powerful, pleasureful drive that binds people to each other is not only feared but hated, which may explain some of the attitudes toward the intellectual in our country.
There are, however, many, many ways as well as conditions in which people learn. For millions of years, man and his predecessors learned without the benefit of schools.21 Modern education has left us with the illusion that a lot is known about learning, that real learning goes on in the school, and that if it doesn't happen in a school or under the aegis of a school (like the year abroad), it has no validity. Holt,22 Kozol,23 Illich,24 and others have written about this process. Education is simply one more instance of man's having developed an elaborate extension (in this case, complex institutions) to do and presumably enhance what he once did for himself quite naturally.
One purpose of an extension is to enhance a particular function of the organism: the knife does a much better job of cutting than the teeth (but not of chewing). Language and mathematics enhance certain aspects of thinking. But, like the knife, they don't do the whole job. The telescope and the microscope extend the eye, while the camera extends the visual memory system. Wheels enable man to get around faster, but they can't dance or climb cliffs, and when they are powered by motors, atrophy of important body functions can result.
Possibly most important of all, an extended function reveals something of the process from which it springs. There is a discovery factor as well as an emergent property to extensions. Language is a prime example. The linguist Chomsky25 has used language to tell him something of how he thinks certain portions of the brain are organized, and while Chomsky's main conclusions are not in my mind supported by what is known about either language or the brain, he is correct in looking to language for a map of a particular part of the brain.
Man's mechanical extensions tell us not only about man's brain, but about his body as well. At this point, the reader may have some trouble personalizing what has just been said. Many of man's extensions really are expressions of his basic nature, but we also learn from this that man has many basic natures. From our extensions, we begin to get a picture of the incredible diversity of human talent. Consider the people who have neither feeling for nor understanding of machines, and confront them with people who do. Or consider the miracle of composing music and writing poetry, or the beauty of mathematics to those who understand it, compared to the mystery of it all to those who do not. Science and art are direct products of the human central nervous system. Yet the ET factor frequently blinds us to the miracle of it all. If there ever was an example of the externalization process, it is the institution called science. To experience some of the impact of this process, one must think back upon the times when Egyptian and Sumerian priests were attempting for the first time to systematize quantities and magnitudes—systems for measuring and recording plots of land—in the Middle East deltas, just as the Phoenician traders were beginning to record the position of the stars to navigate by. In terms of my earlier formulations,26 those shared systems that are carried in the head are informal. The technical ones are externalized, i.e. extended, and carried on outside the body. The process of externalizing is continuous and is illustrated by Einstein's efforts to transform his mental insights into either words or mathematics27—two extensional systems that were ready-made and waiting at the time of Einstein's birth. What captivated Einstein was the incredible beauty of mathematics. He felt a deep kinship with this picture of the mind, though I am not sure that he realized that this is what mathematics is. The exciting thing about mathematics and science and music and literature is what they can tell us about the workings of the human mind. For these disciplines are literally models of at least certain parts of the mind. Just as the knife cuts but does not chew, while the lens does only a portion of what the eye can do, extensions are reductionist in their capability. No matter how hard it tries, the human race can never fully replace what was left out of extensions in the first place. Also, it is just as important to know what is left out of a given extension system as it is to know what the system will do. Yet the extension-omissions side is frequently overlooked.
It is the characteristic of all extension systems to be treated as distinct and separate from the user and to take on an identity of their own. Religions, philosophies, literature, and art illustrate this. After a time, the extended system accretes to itself a past and a history as well as a body of knowledge and skills that can be learned. Such systems can be studied and appreciated as entities in themselves. Culture is the prime example.28
Another important feature of extensions is that they make possible the sharing of human talents that could be accomplished in no other way. One does not have to be able to write poetry, compose music, or paint in order to derive pleasure from the arts. The technically gifted who design and produce automobiles, radios, and TV sets multiply their talent a millionfold: every time a viewer turns on his TV set, he shares the creative talents of hundreds of other minds.
The study of man is a study of his extensions. It is now possible to actually see evolution taking place, an evolution that occurs outside the organism and at a greatly accelerated pace when compared to intrinsic evolution. Man has dominated the earth because his extensions have evolved so fast that there is nothing to stand in their way. The risk, of course, is that by enormously multiplying his power, man is in the position of being able to destroy his own biotope—that part of the environment that contains within it the basic elements for satisfying human needs. Unfortunately, because they do have a life of their own, extensions have a way of taking over. The mathematical genius Norbert Wiener,29 shortly before he died, saw the danger of his brain child, the computer, and warned against letting it play too prominent a role in human affairs. The automobile is another mechanical system that has so many people and so much of the American economy dependent on it that it is difficult to see, short of catastrophe, any possibility of reversing the takeover trend. Everything has fallen to the automobile—the livability of cities, the countryside, clean air, healthy bodies, etc.
Extensions fragment life and dissociate man from his acts. This is serious. Modern warfare is a dreadful example of how mechanical systems can be used to kill at a distance without any involvement in the process. It is so easy for a president to say, "Drop more bombs, and that will bring them in line."
The characteristic of extension systems that is potentially most harmful and requires constant vigilance is illustrated by this example of a young psychotherapist who is talking to his mentor following a lecture in which certain basic psychiatric connections were made in a new way: Seeking practical advice on the application of his guru's thinking, the younger man brings up the case of one of his patients. His request for help is rebuffed with an impatient gesture and the comment, "That doesn't count, that's real life." In this instance, the two men are struggling with the difficulty of reconciling the complexity of real life with theory—a third or fourth step in a long process of abstraction from life. The danger is that real-life problems are dismissed while philosophical and theoretical systems are treated as real. I see this every day in my students. It has been my experience that after students have spent sixteen or more years in our education system they have been so brainwashed that it is impossible to get them to go out and simply observe and report back what they heard, what they felt, or what went on before their eyes. Most of them are helpless in the face of real life, because they have to know beforehand what they are going to discover and have a theory or a hypothesis to test. Why? Because that is the way they have been taught. What is more, for those who go on for advanced degrees, that is the way they will get their money for research and their "brownie points" for publication.
If people are to live wisely on this earth, they must be more aware of how different kinds of extensions work and the influence they exert upon all of us. For instance, the way in which information is stored in a given social system and how it flows influences how mechanical extensions are integrated. In cultures in which people are deeply involved with each other, and cultures such as the American Indian, in which information is widely shared—what we will term high-context cultures—simple messages with deep meaning flow freely. Such cultures are likely to be overwhelmed by mechanical systems and lose their integrity.30 The low-context cultures, those highly individualized, somewhat alienated, fragmented cultures such as the Swiss and the German, in which there is relatively little involvement with people, can apparently absorb and use man's mechanical extensions without losing their cultural integrity. In these cultures, people become more and more like their machines. Even here in the United States one can see what technology has done to rural areas. The small community of a hundred years ago, while it has not vanished, is becoming more and more rare as young people go to towns and cities, where there are work and action.
People learn to speak their language, to read, skate, ride bicycles, fly, and ski. Man learns to use his extensions but pays little attention to what lies behind them. Some of them can be extraordinarily complex, such as the tools of "science" or the weapons of war. But they can all tell us I great deal about ourselves. There was a time (two to four million years ago) when man's extensions were limited to a few crude tools and the rudiments of language. Man's basic nature has changed very little since then. All of culture is a complex system of extensions. Therefore, culture is subject to the ET syndrome and all that it implies. That is, culture is experienced as man, and vice versa. What is more, man is frequently seen as a pale reflection of his culture or as a shoddy version that never quite measures up, and man's basic humanness is frequently overlooked or repressed in the process.
From now on, how one arrives at a definition of the relationship of man's basic nature to his culturally conditioned control systems is of crucial importance. For in our shrinking globe man can ill afford cultural illiteracy.
