Consistency and Life

Man's nervous system evolved before the time of mass media, mass transportation, airplanes, and automobiles. For over a million years, our forefathers knew the significance of every act of all the individuals around them. Like the body language of a dog who wags his tail and prances with forepaws spread out, saying, "Let's play," or raises the hair on his back, saying, "Stay away," the physical signs as well as the behavioral cues of people who were known were easy to read. Stability and predictability were essential if human society was to prosper, develop, and evolve to its present point. Living today in a rapidly changing, ever-shrinking world, it is hard for most of us to conceive what it would be like to grow up and live in a world that did not change, and where there were few strangers because one always saw and dealt with the same people. Those who were raised in the now-disappearing small town have some notion of what it must have been like during the major portion of man's past—quite comfortable and reassuring, but very public. People knew what was coming next before you did something or even knew that you were going to do it. "Jake's going to get a new horse." "Yup. He always fattens up the old one before he trades.Too cheap to feed'em the rest of the time."
"You can always tell when Mike's getting ready to take somebody apart. First, he gets up and walks around, then he looks out the window with his back to everyone, pulls out his pocket comb and gets every hair in place. 'When he turns around and looks at them, you know it's going to happen."
Unlike animals, many of whose responses are innate, much of man's communicative behavior evolved independently of his physiology, and like the spoken language, it cannot be read with assurance if one is dealing with a new culture or even a subculture one does not know well. Man's body is recognizably human everywhere, even though such superficial characteristics as skin color, hair form, physiognomy, and body build may vary. Unless we start tampering with it, this panhuman form will be with us for thousands of generations to come. What has changed, what has evolved, and what is characteristically man—in fact, what gives man his identity no matter where he is born—is his culture, the total communication framework: words, actions, postures, gestures, tones of voice, facial expressions, the way he handles time, space, and materials, and the way he works, plays, makes love, and defends himself. All these things and more are complete communication systems with meanings that can be read correctly only if one is familiar with the behavior in its historical, social, and cultural context.1
Everything man is and does is modified by learning and is therefore malleable. But once learned, these behavior patterns, these habitual responses, these ways of interacting gradually sink below the surface of the mind and, like the admiral of a submerged submarine fleet, control from the depths. The hidden controls are usually experienced as though they were innate simply because they are not only ubiquitous but habitual as well.2
What makes it doubly hard to differentiate the innate from the acquired is the fact that, as people grow up, everyone around them shares the same patterns. This is not true, of course, if one grows up in a bicultural or tricultural situation, which can be a tremendous asset because it accustoms one to the fact that people are really very different in the ways they behave. In bicultural cases, I have seen people shift from a Spanish to a German way of interacting without knowing that the shift occurred. Also, I have seen others start with a Greek pattern and slip automatically into a German-Swiss pattern as the situation demanded.
Fantastic? Yes, but reasonably common—a function of the way the information-processing and control mechanisms of the brain operate, points that will be described in Chapter 12. In fact, according to Powers,3 man's nervous system is structured in such a way that the patterns that govern behavior and perception come into consciousness only when there is a deviation from plan. That is why the most important paradigms or rules governing behavior, the ones that control our lives, function below the level of conscious awareness and are not generally available for analysis. This is an important point, one that is often overlooked or denied. The cultural unconscious, like Freud's unconscious, not only controls man's actions but can be understood only by painstaking processes of detailed analysis. Hence, man automatically treats what is most characteristically his own (the culture of his youth) although it were innate. He is forced into the position of thinking and feeling that anyone whose behavior is not predictable or is peculiar in any way is slightly out of his mind, improperly brought up, irresponsible, psychopathic, politically motivated to a point beyond all redemption or just plain inferior.
A comment one frequently bears in cross-cultural situations is: "Oh, I just try to be myself and take them as they are. After all, they are adult human beings, aren't they?" Fine and dandy. In superficial social situations, the be yourself formula works. But what if you are an Anglo schoolteacher with a Spanish American class and are confronted with what appears to be a lack of motivation on the part of your students? You, as a non-Spanish American take it for granted that a certain percentage of children want to do well and to get ahead. So it comes as a shock when you learn that, to many New Mexican Spanish, to stand out from one's peers is to place oneself in great jeopardy and is to be avoided at all costs. Suddenly, your old stereotypes take on a new meaning.
Today, man is increasingly placed in positions in which culture can no longer be depended upon to produce reliable readings of what other people are going to do next. He is constantly in the position of interacting with strangers, so he must take the next step and begin to transcend his culture. This cannot be done in an armchair.
However, what may at first be experienced as a very difficult chore can turn out to be deeply and personally significant. In this context, it is important to keep reminding oneself that the part of man's nervous system that deals with social behavior is designed according to the principle of negative feedback. That is, one is completely unaware of the fact that there is a system of controls as long as the program is followed. Ironically, this means that the majority of humankind are denied knowledge of important parts of the self by virtue of the way the control systems work. The only time one is aware of the control system is when things don't follow the hidden program. This is most frequent in intercultural encounters. Therefore, the great gift that the members of the human race have for each other is not exotic experiences but an opportunity to achieve awareness of the structure of their own system, which can be accomplished only by interacting with others who do not share that system—members of the opposite sex, different age groups, different ethnic groups, and different cultures—all suffice. I never would have understood the degree to which Americans use time, not only to structure their lives but as a contexting communication system as well, if I had not been through the experience of observing my countrymen trying to cope with other time systems. That logic, clear thinking, and nature were not all part of a single bundle became clear to me only after I had been to Japan and again found my countrymen frustrated by what they called "indirection." It was also evident that the Japanese were equally turned off by our insisting on spelling out "logical" steps without reference to context. The Japanese are very consistent once you get to know them, but unpredictable if you don't. Admittedly, it is difficult for hard-nosed American businessmen to deal with indirection and accustom themselves to the fact that in Japan verbal agreements are binding and much preferred to the ironbound written contract of the West, which can always be nullified or abrogated anyway.
Overseas, the picture one gets of Americans is that they are distrustful and frequently paranoid in their relations with each other. Our word is not our bond. One gathers from this that the creative use of intercultural relations exposes some very deep, highly personalized, and sensitive areas of the psyche. This may explain why the more significant aspects of culture are so frequently and persistently brushed aside. Take the matter of not trusting people, so that everything has to be on the dotted line. If we Americans are honest with ourselves, our experiences with other cultures could teach us a good deal about what it is like to live in a trusting world. Perhaps then we would not be quite so fearful of others.
In studying one's self by the cross-cultural technique, one starts with the notion that what is known least well and is therefore in the poorest position to be studied is what is closest to oneself; as stated above, these are the unconscious patterns that control one's life. In the past, and at home, it was the shared patterns that made life predictable and provided the order that can be observed in all nature.
Those of us who have embarked on the task of understanding ourselves and others abroad have encountered scenes that are almost beyond belief—not at all what our own culturally conditioned projective systems led us to expect. The mental maps that we carry with us, based as they are on our own cultural experience, are little better than those Columbus had when he sailed west to find India in 1492. There are even great continents yet to be discovered—vast areas of human experience about which Western man knows nothing. Remember, our own maps are of territory known so completely—like one's hometown neighborhood that there is no need to make them explicit. The fact that they are in our heads is sufficient. It's only in strange territory that one needs a true externalized, tangible chart.
Most cultural exploration begins with the annoyance of being lost. The control systems of the mind signal that something unexpected has arisen, that we are in uncharted waters and are going to have to switch off the automatic pilot and man the helm ourselves. There's a reef where we least expect it. Sadly enough, people in real-life situations don't actually see it this way, because the almost inevitable response is to deny that the reef is there until one has run aground.
I once had occasion to decipher a rather extraordinary pattern in a small country in the Far East where there were very few Americans. The members of the U.S. official missions were the only Americans in the country. Exquisitely beautiful, and populated with people who were kind, friendly and gentle, the country was as close to a tropical paradise as one could find. But there was a fly in the ointment. On official visits, the Americans were kept waiting inordinately long. It was almost as though they weren't there. Some waited for hours. Even the newly appointed U.S. ambassador was kept waiting! In ordinary diplomatic circumstances such treatment would constitute an official insult to our government. Yet something told the Americans that this might not be the case: there were too many cues to the contrary. Besides, relations between the two countries were friendly and there was no reason to insult everyone indiscriminately, even before the first meeting. The Americans were mystified, of course. For those familliar with Southeast Asia, horoscopes will come to mind, because there was always the added complication of horoscopes which had to be cast before all important events. In fact, the astrologer's reading prefaced every form of involvement. Yet the horoscope did not seem to be the significant variable in the long, heel-cooling reception-room delays, because the neighboring countries, where horoscopes were also used, did not keep officials waiting.
Using its own bureaucratic paradigm and characteristic American attention to time, the U. S. Embassy finally instructed all employees that if they were on official business they should wait only twenty minutes and, if they had not been received, they should leave and return later. That way, they would be showing respect but they could avoid the personal insult of having to wait thirty to forty-five minutes or even an hour. This procedure took care of the Americans' anxiety, anger, and guilt but did little to inform them of the reasons behind the protracted delays. In response to an obviously strange and puzzling communication, the Americans produced in a typically human way a solution that fit the larger paradigm of their own culture, which is what people generally do. However, by so doing they managed to block any learning either about themselves or their hosts.
The case was interesting to me because it reaffirmed earlier observations of how Americans unconsciously structure time: For official business between people who are not on intimate terms, the eastern-seaboard middle-class pattern holds; it's expected that one will be prompt. Five minutes late calls for a small apology; ten minutes, a bit more must be said; fifteen minutes requires a definite apology plus an explanation; thirty minutes is insulting; and so on.4 Waiting time is similarly structured. For Americans, these are not "mere conventions," which function at the higher levels of consciousness (as is the case for the English middle and upper classes), but constitute an entire communication system as well as a basic pattern for organizing activities. The twenty-minute waiting limit set for official visits was not an accidental figure pulled out of a hat by some bureaucrat. Knowing the circumstances, it was precisely what could have been predicted and entirely consistent with American informal norms. (Long enough to be polite and short enough to preserve official face.) Behavior of this type is so stereotyped that once the pattern is perceived, observing it is a little bit like pressing a button on a machine and watching the lights go on. The machine—if it is working properly—will always produce the same response; so will the members of a given culture. Otherwise, life cannot continue.
Clearly, analogies between cultures and machines must be taken very lightly, because no machine (even the most advanced complex of computers) can even begin to compare with the complexity of human beings, to say nothing of their transactions with each other. Then again, there is the extension-omission factor. This is an expression of the incapacity of any extension to reproduce all the functions of the organ or activity that is extended. Nevertheless, if the nature of a given mythical machine or organism is unknown, one way to discover what it will do is to vary the inputs and see how it responds. Imagine for a minute an organism so designed that it controls its own inputs according to a program and a series of reference signals of which it is completely unaware. The only way it could discover the nature of the control system used to maintain constancy of input would be to change things systematically in a series of steps in such a way that the organism would have to bring things back to normal. For purposes of a thought experiment, the particular organism is very simple; it swims in a tank of water and during certain hours of the day it stays at a given level just below the surface. If we depress the nose a bit, it corrects itself. But maybe it only responds in one way, will only raise its nose, so we devise another test and get underneath and push the nose up. Again it corrects itself. If the level swimming organism were to be compared to a man who has so arranged his life that he does everything according to schedule, he will, after a while, if he arranges things properly, lose his awareness both of the schedule and of his need for the schedule until something happens to throw things out of line, at which point his attention will be directed more toward the disruption than toward his own need for scheduling.
This is basically what has happened to the peoples of the world. If the early white settlers in North America couldn't make the Indians conform to the European paradigm, the response was to destroy what could not be controlled and what did not perform in a predictable manner.
The cost of controlling one's inputs by destroying others eventually gets too high to maintain, although there may be (and often is) little awareness of the fact that the cost is too great, because of a preoccupation with the job of trying to maintain control in an unpredictable situation. A second strategy is to ignore the possibility of another pattern or to delude oneself by saying that all the patterns in the world are basically the same or that the differences don't matter or are mere conventions. This avoids the issue very nicely but creates the added difficulty of setting the two systems on a collision course.
To give some idea, in physical terms, of the processes being discussed, I will describe another thought experiment in which the action changes as things happen. First, let us imagine ten blindfolded men in a room playing blindman's bluff. These men have been hypnotized into the belief that they can see. The result is a series of unexpected collisions. Next, tell these same men that in order to avoid the unexpected collisions they must work harder, intensify their efforts, move faster, swing their arms more. Furthermore, with each unexpected encounter they must increase the tempo and intensity of the swings. They will, of course, end up battered, frustrated, and enraged.
Now let's see what happens if the instructions are changed by telling the men, "You are blind but don't know it because everyone around you is blind. In spite of being blind, you have all learned to stay out of each other's way by a system of devices and signals of which you are unaware. So, for all intents and purposes, you have no way of knowing that you can't see. Now we are going to introduce some people into the room who are also blind and, like yourselves, unaware of their blindness. The difference is that they do not stay out of each other's way, because they use human contact as a way of orienting themselves. They prefer bumping to staying out of each other's way."
If we watch the experiment in our mind's eye, we will see that each group finds the other frustrating. The first group is unexpectedly bumped and fondled. The second group has trouble orienting itself because people keep avoiding contact. Since neither group is aware that they are blind nor do they know how to keep in contact or from being bumped, neither will ever think that it is worthwhile testing for vision. Until the two different groups meet, they will not pay close attention to the cues needed either to keep out of each other's way or to make contact in order to keep oriented. Paradoxically, the cues will become known only in a situation in which they won't work. And while it is not essential, in fact superfluous, to define the nature of a substitute visual system as long as everyone is using the same system, the only way to avoid being bumped and escalating into a swinging match is to be able to identify those aspects of the two signal systems that are in conflict. This means that, for the first group, instead of increasing speed and swinging their arms every time they are bumped, they must now slow down and become acutely aware of signals being emitted and received so that they can be consciously read and controlled. The lesson is fourfold:
One has an unconscious, very effective avoidance system at one's command.
There are other people in the world, whose goal is to see human beings, not avoid them.
Like yourself, these people are neither aware of the fact that they are blind nor
that their behavior is systematic, highly consistent, and predictable.

As a matter of fact, the blindman's-buff analogy is a much oversimplified example of the situation we face when we interact with members of other cultures or even of variants of our own culture. This means that if one is to prosper in this new world without being unexpectedly battered, one must transcend one's own system. To do so, two things must be known: first, that there is a system; and second, the nature of that system. What is more, the only way to master either is to seek out systems that are different from one's own and, using oneself as a sensitive recording device, make note of every reaction or tendency to escalate. Ask yourself questions that will help define the state you were in as well as the one you are escalating to. It is impossible to do this in the abstract, because there are too many possibilities; behavioral systems are too complex. The rules governing behavior and structure of one's own cultural system can be discovered only in a specific context or real-life situation. With this background, let us return to the case of the Americans in the small Asian country and discuss what was actually happening as they were kept waiting. I eventually was able to identify a pattern that explained the puzzling behavior of their hosts. The Americans were kept waiting because they were not known and had not taken on substance. A newly arrived official in someone's outer office was like an undeveloped film; there was no tangible, experiential image of the man. No one knew him as a friend or a human being. You could see him and hear him bellowing about being kept waiting and how important he was, but in terms of relationships in a social system he was at best a shadow and one that didn't look too promising at that. Americans who were willing to come back repeatedly and to meet their hosts socially outside the office had a chance to become flesh-and-blood, active members in a social system. Ultimately, they had no trouble being ushered into offices. Americans saw people in terms of their status, whereas the hosts saw them in a larger frame that took more time to integrate.
Two points about this case stand out: first, the fact that neither party could shed any light on the situation when questioned directly, because both assumed the other was familiar with the workings of his own system without realizing there was a system; second, the incredible differences in the systems that emerged once they were revealed. In working out the explanation to this particular paradox, I was aided by the knowledge that I was initially blind to the inner workings of my own culture and hence had already forced myself to learn a good deal about how American behavioral paradigms work. I also knew, for example, that all over the Far East, people's behavior toward each other is guided by their relationships in a quite stable, long-persisting social system.
The question is: How could the American continue to control his inputs in a situation as basically different from his own as the one just described? First, he must give up some of his narcissism and make adjustments in his own program, such as freeing himself of the binding grip of preset schedules that determine the rate at which human transactions must progress. Instead, he must build relationships with his hosts according to their schedules, make himself real, and allow time to take on substance as a human being, to be believable and predictable, before he tries to do anything else. This is something that hard-nosed bureaucrats who pride themselves on maintaining schedules, and businessmen obsessed with saving time, have found impossible to practice or tolerate in others. They see building a relationship as an expensive personal indulgence, a waste of time, or, even worse, indicative of "going over to the other side." (The Foreign Service keeps people moving precisely so they won't establish lasting relationships with the local people.)
In my experience, the two systems just discussed both require time; it is all a matter of where it is spent. Time spent getting to know people is saved later, because it is possible to cover so much more ground in a shorter time with a friend. The two systems are representative of what I have termed high- and low-context cultures (Chapters 6 and 7). In general, high-context cultures—those which call for considerable programming of individuals to each other—have greater mass and are therefore more predictable, if, and only if, one is familiar with the system. On the other hand, to the observer who doesn't know there is another system, a strange high-context culture can be completely mystifying, although he may not know or accept the fact that he is mystified. Why? The force of his own cultural stereotypes will be so strong that it will distort what he sees; he will delude himself that he knows what's going on before his eyes. This, of course, is a most dangerous and risky situation and one that unfortunately is all too common.
No one likes to give up his stereotypes, but to have to admit that one does not know the local ground rules even though competent or expert at home is more than most people can tolerate. Having spent significant segments of my professional life translating behavior of one culture into another, I have learned that translating is one thing, getting people to believe it is another. To date, there are two, only partially effective means of overcoming the granite-like persistence of an individual's control system. One is to spend a lifetime in a foreign country, dealing on a day-to-day basis with the reality of its system; the other is a very extensive, highly sophisticated training program that includes not only the language but the culture. Such training must take into account these facts:
People's nervous systems are organized according to the principles of negative feedback; that is, the whole thing works so smoothly and automatically that the only time the control system is consciously brought into play is when the input signals deviate from the norm. Therefore, people individually and collectively are for the most part unaware of the patterns and reference signals governing behavior.
People primarily spend their lives managing their inputs (the reverse of the popular notion).
The reality and structure of a person's own paradigms become available only in bits and pieces and in very special cases, usually after repeated unsuccessful attempts to maintain constancy of input in the face of a foreign culture.
Reading the behavior of well-known friends and relatives is like covering thoroughly familiar ground without a mental map or talking before writing systems had even been heard of. One does not need a writing system to talk (or technical awareness of the rules governing speech either). To abstract such a system from the living data where none existed before, however, is a formidable task, an intellectual achievement that can equal the great accomplishments in chemistry, physics, and astronomy.
Until recently, man did not need to be aware of the structure of his own behavioral systems, because, staying at home, the behavior of most people was highly predictable. Today, however, man is constantly interacting with strangers, because his extensions have both widened his range and caused his world to shrink. It is therefore necessary for man to transcend his own culture, and this can be done only by making explicit the rules by which it operates.

A portion of what is involved in this complex process is described in the succeeding chapters. To tackle this job, one must consider the nature of man's central nervous system, his several brains, how he images, the role of context in determining behavior, and how some of the basic cultural systems such as time and space are used to organize behavior.
