Rhythm and Body Movement

"There is no absolute knowledge, and those who claim it, whether they are scientists or dogmatists, open the door to tragedy."
J. Bronowski.1

What can the body tell us? Plenty—if we observe how people actually move: whether they move together in synchrony or not, the kind of rhythm they are moving to, as well as the many tiny, unnoticeable events that make up any transaction. The publication of Birdwhistell's Introduction to Kinesics, in 1952, marked the beginning of the technical study of body movement; since then, many people have been stimulated and influenced by Birdwhistell's work. One of the several offshoots of these studies reveals highly significant data on synchrony (moving together) that are of relevance to all of us.
Syncing, or "being in sync," may be a new concept to some readers, but for others it is very familiar.2 People in interactions either move together (in whole or in part) or they don't and in failing to do so are disruptive to others around them. Basically, people in interactions move together in a kind of dance, but they are not aware of their synchronous movement and they do it without music or conscious orchestration. Being "in sync" is itself a form of communication. The body's messages (in or out of awareness), whether read technically or not, seldom lie, and come much closer to what the person's true but sometimes unconscious feelings are than does the spoken word. A number of scientists have worked on the subject of kinesics and synchrony and its significance. Since the field is growing more extensive and complex every day, the work of only one man will be discussed here.
In the early sixties, William Condon,3 working then at Pennsylvania's Western State Psychiatric Institute, began a frame-by-frame analysis of 16mm films of people talking to each other. Each movement, no matter how minor, was recorded on a large sheet of paper along a time line, so that it was possible to identify all movements that were occurring at a given instant in time. From these studies, we learn that everything that man does can be shown to be under the control of the "body synchronizers."4
Moving pictures are normally taken at 18, 24, and 64 frames per second, so that the events being measured are somewhat less than 1/18, 1/24, and 1/64 of a second apart. At intervals of less than 1/64 of a second Condon found it impossible to detect body synchrony. However, within this rather narrow range it is possible to see remarkable characteristics of human interaction. Movies by Condon5 and Birdwhistell,6 as well as my own, taken in a variety of settings and circumstances, reveal that when two people talk to each other their movements are synchronized. Sometimes this occurs in barely perceptible ways, when finger, eyelid (blinking), and head movements occur simultaneously and in sync with specific parts of the verbal code (the words, with pitches and stresses) as it unwinds. In other cases, the whole body moves as though the two were under the control of a master choreographer who has written what Lawrence Halprin calls "an open score."7 Viewing movies in very slow motion, looking for synchrony, one realizes that what we know as dance is really a slowed-down, stylized version of what human beings do whenever they interact.
Syncing is panhuman. It appears to be innate, being well established by the second day of life, and may be present as early as the first hour after birth. What is more, stop motion and slow motion studies of movies of newborn children made by Condon and his associates8 revealed that the newborn infants initially synchronized the movement of their bodies to speech regardless of the language. American children, for example, synced with Chinese just as well as they did with English. From this, it appears that synchrony is perhaps the most basic element of speech and the foundation on which all subsequent speech behavior rests.
Condon9 was so struck by the fact that people's every movement was "in sync" with the words, down to and including eye blinks and syllables, that he thought there might be a semantic score. To test for this possibility, his subjects were given nonsense syllables to read. The synchrony was the same. Sense or nonsense, it made no difference. The only thing that destroyed synchrony was if one of the people was called out of the conversation by a third party. Synchrony stopped, and a new chain was set up with the new interlocutor.
In an attempt to find how this was accomplished, Condon devised a number of experiments. After more than a decade of work with a time/motion analyzes (a projector that can be run at any speed and stopped at any frame), he thinks of the process as operating at many levels in which two nervous systems "drive" each other. In one striking experiment,10 two people in conversation were wired to electroencephalographs to see if there was any comparability in brain waves. Two cameras were set up so that one focused on the speakers, the other on the EEG recording pens. When the two people talked, the recording pens moved together as though driven by a single brain. When one of the individuals was called out of the conversation by a third person, the pens no longer moved together. Fantastic, isn't it? Yet the data are incontrovertible. What is now known represents a preface, with the rest of the book yet to be written. I say this because Condon did his work with average white subjects. As of this writing, similar movies of black subjects showed such a different pattern as to represent an entirely new language to Condon, indicating that while infants will sync with the human voice regardless of language, they later become habituated to the rhythms of their own language and culture.
As a consequence of years of microanalyses of film, Condon is convinced that it no longer makes sense to view human beings as "… isolated entities sending discrete messages" to each other. Rather, it would be more profitable to view the "bond" between humans as the result of participation within shared organizational forms. This means humans are tied to each other by hierarchies of rhythms that are culture-specific and expressed through language and body movement.
The results of one of my own research projects support Condon's conclusions. Several years ago, when my students and I were working with blacks under controlled conditions, we uncovered great differences in the kinesic and proxemic,11 linguistic and other behavior patterns between working-class blacks and a wide range of whites (working class to upper middle class). Such unconscious differences may well be one of the sources of what blacks feel is the basic racism of white society.
The subject of racism on the unconscious behavioral level is touchy, complex, often oversimplified, and frequently treated improperly. For example, it is the practice of my regional subculture to avoid direct eye contact with strangers in public when they are closer than twelve to fourteen feet. A member of any group that is used to visual involvement inside that distance will automatically misread my behavior. When miscuing of this sort is added to feelings of rejection, prejudice, or discrimination on the conscious level, the results can be overwhelming, for it is natural to lump all behavior together and not to distinguish between conscious, deliberate racism and structural differences in cultural systems. To categorize all behavior as racist sidesteps the issue that not every white is consciously or even unconsciously racist but will, regardless of how he feels, use white forms of communication (both verbal and nonverbal), if for no other reason than he simply does not know any others. While blacks could teach whites to use black nonverbal forms, this is very difficult to do, because of a built-in tendency for all groups to interpret their own nonverbal communicative patterns as though they were universal.
Whites do not move the way working-class blacks do or the way Puerto Ricans move or Mexicans or Pueblo or Navajo Indians, Chinese or Japanese. Each culture has its own characteristic manner of locomotion, sitting, standing, reclining, and gesturing. To demonstrate this, one has only to take one of the small, popular Super-8 cameras and record people walking in public where ethnicity can be identified with certainty. Then record another group, and view the movies over and over at slow speed. After these repeated viewings, the differences will become clear. One of my students, a young black woman, was able to identify some fifteen differences in walking behavior between whites and Pueblo Indians by using this very simple procedure.12
Syncing, tempo, and rhythm are all related. But most people are unaware when these are happening. When they become aware, they are unable to pay attention to anything else. Also, paying attention to one's own unconscious behavior will usually disrupt that behavior.
Birdwhistell has defined kinesics as the way one moves and handles one's body. One of the most basic of all modes of communication, kinesics as communication was well established before the emergence of mammalian life. Lizards, birds, and mammals communicate this way among themselves and, to some extent, to animals of different species. People recognize posture and body movement even at a distance. But unlike other mammals, we have specialized the language of the body so that it is integrated and congruent with everything else we do. It is therefore culturally determined and must be read against a cultural backdrop. That is, the significance of a posture or act is only partially readable across cultural boundaries. In new and unknown situations, in which one is likely to be most dependent on reading nonverbal cues (NVC), the chances of one's being correct decrease as cultural distances increase. Even two people as closely related as the Americans and the English have problems reading each other's kinesics. I do not want to give the impression that there are not innate responses such as the smile (Ekman and Friesen13 and Eibl-Eibesfeldt14). But even smiles must be seen in context. The reassuring smile of the used-car salesman as he unloads a lemon is a deliberate deception. Yet, Ekman and Friesen have shown, he gives himself away—there is leakage.15 However, the specific form the leakage takes is not universal but must be read culturally.
Kinesics and posture are easy to see. Synchronous movement occurs on another, deeper level; while the actual rhythms may be different, they are represented in all groups. A striking example of group sync was once captured by one of my students on film as a seminar project. Using an abandoned car as a blind, he photographed children dancing and skipping in a school playground during their lunch hour. At first, they looked like so many kids each doing his own thing. After a while, we noticed that one little girl was moving more than the rest. Careful study revealed that she covered the entire playground. Following procedures laid down for my students, this young man viewed the film over and over at different speeds. Gradually, he perceived that the whole group was moving in synchrony to a definite rhythm. The most active child, the one who moved about most, was the director, the orchestrator of the playground rhythm! Not only was there a rhythm and a beat, but the beat seemed familiar. Seeking help from a friend deeply involved in rock music, who also viewed the film several times we found a tune that fit the rhythm. Then the music was synchronized with the children's play and once synchronized remained in sync for the entire 4½ minutes of the film clip!
However, when some people actually saw the film and heard the explanation of the experiment, they had trouble understanding that an unconscious undercurrent of synchronized movement tied the group together. Because they didn't understand this, they felt compelled to invent explanations. One school principal who heard the explanation and saw the film after it had been synchronized with music spoke of the children as "dancing to the music"; another person who read the description wanted to know if all the children were "humming the tune." Both were wrong. The children were screaming and yelling and laughing and making all the playground noises that children make. Without knowing it, they were all moving to a beat which they generated themselves. This did not mean that they were all moving at the same time, just as there are times when different sections of an orchestra are silent. They even had a conductor who kept the beat going continuously.
The process is not easy to understand, because most of us are much too used to dealing with second-, third-, or fourth-generation communication systems such as language and writing. My student had identified the source where the written music that gets composed and played came from. I am sure that there will be composers who will know immediately what I am talking about just as there will be those who won't, because they have been taught to look to other musicians for their music and to disregard the ocean of rhythm in which they are immersed in everyday life. Yet people swim indifferent oceans. Those of us brought up in the northern European tradition are underdeveloped rhythmically. We have a single beat that we dance to, whereas the Tiv of Nigeria have four drums, one for each part of the body. Each drummer beats out a different rhythm; talented dancers move to all four.16
Discoveries of this sort have far-reaching implications. Music and dance, for instance, can be seen in a new light. While others will fill in the details, it is worthwhile to sketch in the broad outlines of the general significance of man's rhythms here. Once, on the island of Mykonos, I noticed a group of young people around a table in a sidewalk cafe listening to their portable radio tuned to rock music. Close observation from the next table revealed that they were not consciously listening to the music but were using it instead as a sort of sine wave with which to synchronize their own movements as a way of heightening or strengthening the group bond.
Even the spoken language can be used for syncing, as I discovered a few years ago while building an office addition to my house. I had hired some of my Spanish American neighbors to do the actual labor and, for a variety of reasons, spent most of my working day with them. Soon several things became apparent. Conversation was continuous. It never stopped. Yet the content was not highly relevant. They were talking to be talking. If the conversation lagged, the work lagged. Two or three men could work in a very small area without ever seeming to interfere with each other, and they worked very close together. Whether adobe bricks were being laid, plaster was being applied to the walls, or cement was being smoothed, the whole operation was like a ballet, with the rhythm of the conversation providing the unconscious score that strengthened the group bond and kept them from interfering with each other.
On quite a different level, most Americans are familiar with the working songs of blacks that were (and still presumably are) used to synchronize physical labor. I am convinced that most people saw these songs—since they were so obviously used as syncing devices—as the black man's way of making labor less onerous. Very few realized that they, themselves, did the same thing but in a much less noticeable way.
What struck me first when working with different cultures in different parts of the world was how everybody moved. If one wanted to fit in, or not appear too conspicuous, it was helpful to begin to move to the local rhythm and conform to the local beat. All living things internalize and respond to dozens of rhythms—night and day, lunar, seasonal, annual, as well as the shorter cycles and rhythms such as breathing rate, heart beat, and the various brain waves—to say nothing of the rhythms of hunger and of sex. Despite the studies that demonstrated that women living in groups in dormitories and sorority houses tend to phase their periods and that patients on wards phase metabolism if they are together long enough, I was not prepared for the fact that man probably syncs everything he does and when he is out of phase this is a sign that something is very, very wrong.
In high-context cultures, syncing is very noticeable. It functions on a high level of awareness, and is consciously valued. Perhaps a source of alienation in the members of high-sync, high-context cultures when interacting with low-sync, low-context cultures is the fact that they do not know how to deal with people who are out of phase.
All of this suggests that:
The way in which people handle synchrony is both rooted in biology (bio-basic) and modified by culture.
Synchrony or lack of it is an index of how things are going and can be an unconscious source of great tension when synchrony is low, absent, or of the wrong kind.
On a practical level, absence or disturbances of synchrony can interfere with work and any group activity—in sports, on production lines, etc. Perhaps one of the things that is wrong with production lines is that they are impossible to sync with and are out of sync with the workers.
Music and dance, by extension transference, are looked upon as activities that are produced by artists and are independent of the audience. The data on synchrony strongly suggest that this is not so. The audience and artist are part of the same process.

When one encounters an art form or style one does not like or finds repulsive, four things are possible: the artist may have done a poor job in capturing the perception or the rhythm; he may be representing an unconventional aspect of behavior or perception (Mondrian's portraits of the visual cortex of the brain)17 or he may have a style that is unfamiliar; he may be expressing a dissociated aspect of behavior, which makes everyone uncomfortable; or he may be foreign and be presenting us with an unfamiliar pattern to which we do not "vibrate." There are other reasons, of course, such as poor technique, incomplete text or message, incongruities between levels, etc. When one thinks of the number of things that can go wrong, it is a wonder that the artist succeeds at all.
In a sense, the new light on synchrony in man reveals that man's relationship to all the art forms is much more intimate than is commonly supposed; man is art and vice versa. There is no way the two can be separated. The whole notion that the two are separate is another example of extension transference (and probably an aberration of Western culture).
While everything that man is and does has significance, rhythms and synchrony of the type I have been describing are classed as having little meaning in the West. However, this could simply be because Western cultures are relatively low-context. For high-context, highly involved cultures, rhythm does have meaning. Recently, there has been a spate of books about nonverbal communication; it's fashionable and everybody's doing it. Opportunistic writers who collect samples and examples from the experts, exploiting the timeliness of the subject, only manage to describe part of the picture, and a distorted part at that. While the new interest in the subject is gratifying to some who have been trying to achieve deeper understanding of nonverbal processes, popularization has done the field a great disservice and may have even made some people somewhat more tense, for fear that they will reveal unknown or undesirable aspects of themselves by the way in which they move. When the whole process was unconscious, nobody was seen as having an advantage. Those who are fearful feel that their own behavior may be used against them and that NVC insights have put a tool in the hands of people who want to manipulate them.
Like anything else, knowledge of NVC can be misused. The danger is that people will (as they've already done) attach a specific meaning to parts of unconscious nonverbal systems—"crossing the legs means you're uptight," or "crossing your arms means you are shutting people out," or touching or caressing the nose means you think the other person or what he said stinks, etc. Book titles such as How to Read A Person Like A Book18 are thoroughly misleading, doubly so because they are designed to satisfy the public's need for highly specific answers to complex questions for which there are no simple answers. Nobody reads anybody else like a book at first. And while a person may touch the end of his nose when speaking, it's impossible to tell what stimulated this action. It could be an association released by something in the perceived field at the time, his interlocutor's necktie which he just notices, his tone of voice, something about his posture that reminded him of his father—in fact, any of a hundred different things. NVCs must always be read in context; in fact, they are often a prominent part of the context in which the verbal part of the message is set. Context never has a specific meaning. Yet the meaning of a communication is always dependent upon the context.
The language of behavior is extraordinarily subtle. Most people are lucky to have one subcultural system under control—the one that reflects their own sex, class, generation, and geographic region within a country. Because of its complexity, efforts to isolate out "bits" of nonverbal communication and generalize from them in isolation are doomed to failure. All articles and books on "body language" that purport to turn the reader into an instant expert from watching people's behavior at cocktail parties are totally misleading. The principal defect in the recent popularizations of body language is that it is presented as independent of the person, as though it were pasted on, something that can be doffed and donned like a suit of clothes or an item of vocabulary. Far from being a superficial form of communication that can be consciously manipulated, NVC systems are interwoven with the fabric of the personality and into society itself, even rooted in how one experiences oneself as a man or a woman. Without these unwritten subtle systems for managing the tremendous diversity of encounters in everyday life, man would be nothing but a machine.
Nonverbal systems are closely tied to ethnicity—in fact, they are of the essence of ethnicity. This creates problems for Americans, who have been slow to accept our ethnicities primarily because we are intolerant of differences and believe that if something is different it is therefore inferior.
Nowhere have I found this to be more apparent than in relations between blacks and whites. For years, blacks have been regarded as underdeveloped whites, when in fact black culture is very rich19 and has its own unwritten rules governing behavior. Recognition of black culture has always been important. Now it is critical.
In any encounter, particularly intercultural or interethnic, the correct reading of the other person's verbal and nonverbal behavior is basic to transactions at all levels. In fact, the correct reading of all sensory inputs and their integration into a coherent picture is one of the most important things we do. There are times when this is not easy, because behavioral systems are tied directly to the self-image system. It is therefore difficult for most of us to accept the reality of another's system, because it involves a different image and may require us to change our own. However, ethnic diversity can be a source of great strength and an invaluable asset, provided people can develop the desire to learn from each other (one of the principal ways of learning about oneself). An intercultural or interethnic encounter can be used to highlight otherwise-hidden structure points of one's own behavior at a rate many times faster than the normal exigencies of life will reveal that same hidden structure. At home, people make mistakes and violate norms; they just don't make as many or as serious mistakes as they do when they are overseas. I would never have been able to identify points in the temporal and spatial behavior of Americans as described in The Silent Language and The Hidden Dimension if I had not been able to observe Americans overseas, struggling to adjust their behavior to people who kept them waiting, came an hour early to dinner (out of respect), or stood too close ("frosting their glasses"). How the cultural interference mode works is illustrated in the following example.
I was once visiting a colleague and friend engaged in interesting research on the Navajo reservation. In this research, portions of the Navajo Indian's unstated world were revealed by how untutored Indians made movies of different events in which they were interested. ('Unstated" or "hidden" is not to be construed as "secret," because no one was interested in secrets or wanted to become involved in them.) The idea was to learn the structure of the implicit, unverbalized grammar of the Navajo visual world. As it turned out, the researchers faced with the Navajo movie method learned more about the unwritten, unspecified structure of their own cinematographic and editing techniques than they did about the Navajo. I played a small role in this experiment when my friend asked me to go over his notes, which were laden with remarks about what the Indians weren't doing. My comment was something like this: "You seem to have a system here, and every time the Navajos violate that system you respond by noting what they aren't doing. How about doing us all a favor, now that you have bean through this experience, by making your own system explicit?" The result was reported in a valuable, highly original book20 on some of the cinematographic conventions of the Western world.
What we learned was that in order to really understand a Navajo movie one had to be a Navajo Indian who was brought up in the traditional Navajo way of life. Differences between white and Navajo visual perception as applied to movie making occurred at almost every level. For example, editing is a big thing among white cinematographers. We think in bits and try to put the bits together in a coherent whole, so that teaching people to edit film is an important part of their training. Not so the Navajo. They have whole sequences in their heads before they begin shooting, and they edit in their heads as they go along! Navajo rhythms are more integrated than our own—they certainly move that way—which makes it possible for them to experience life (even filming) in a more integrated, holistic manner. We, by contrast, cut things up into little pieces, and it can be tough to live in a fragmented world.
