Contexts, High and Low

Is there anything more frustrating than being unable to make things work? I am thinking of the child struggling to tie his shoes, or the agony of the man who has suffered a stroke, striving to make himself understood, to get change out of his pocket, or even to feed himself. Equally frustrating though not quite so obvious are the common, everyday problems people face such as disorientation in space or the inability to get from here to there according to plan, or failure to progress in school or on the job or to control the social system of which one is a part. In these circumstances, life turns from an ego-expanding, joyous process to a shriveled, shadow world hardly worth the effort.
In American culture, depending on our philosophical orientation, we blame such failures on either the individual or the social system. Seldom do we look to our lack of understanding of the processes themselves or entertain the notion that there might be something wrong with the design of our institutions or the manner in which the personality and the culture mesh. Much of this frustration stems from people's failure to quite understand the more obvious, superficial manifestations of the institutions they have created. Remember, it is possible to live life with no knowledge of physiology, speak a language well without knowing linguistics or even schoolteachers' grammar, or use a TV set, a telephone, and an automobile without a clue to electronic or mechanical know-how. It is also possible to grow up and mature in a culture with little or no knowledge of the basic laws that make it work and differentiate it from all other cultures.
Cultures, however, are extraordinarily complex, much more so than TV sets, automobiles, or possibly even human physiology. So how does one go about learning the underlying structure of culture? It does not matter much where one makes one's entry as long as one is consistent in what is being observed. Any of the basic cultural systems and subsystems can serve as a focus for observation. These include matters such as material culture, business institutions,1 marriage and the family, social organization,2 language, even the military (all armies bear the stamp of their culture), sex (I once knew a man who became fascinated with cultural differences in blue movies), and the law. These activities and many more besides reflect and are reflected in culture. I have chosen to compare some differences in the way the law, as it is observed to function in trials, relates to context in different cultures.
I have chosen the law to make points on contexting for several reasons. First, much of the law as it is administered in the United States has been so decontexted in interpretations that it has been transformed from a positive guiding force into something more akin to gambling than a system of justice.3 I do not imply that this is always the case or that attorneys and judges willed it so, merely that the larger culture in which the law functions, as well as crucial decisions reinforced by the weight of custom, have created a low-context edifice in which it is extraordinarily difficult to guarantee that the proceedings can be linked to real life. Second, all men are not equal under the law. There are differences in sex, socioeconomic level, power, and ethnicity. Many of our citizens do not trace their cultural antecedents to England and northern Europe but to other parts of the world, where the law is quite different.
In the United States, our ideal is that we have a government of laws, not men, and many Americans generally approve this view. Others, as a result of firsthand experience with the law, have a different idea and see American law as not only discriminatory but cold, impersonal, and unjust. American lawyers I have known see the law as something that is set apart from real life; that is, somehow more perfect (extension transference again). Lawyers, in their own eyes, are endowed with unique ways of thinking not privy to ordinary men. Richard Nixon, when he was Vice-President, was heard to say, "Yes, I can deal with him—he's a lawyer, too."
There are times when lawyers give laymen the impression that there is something special about the law. In American culture, this is true. However, it is true because of the culture, not the law. The culture underlies the law, and many things can be read and understood by studying the way in which the law is handled. Like many aspects of our culture the law is so designed as to operate apart from the rest of life. The common inadmissibility of contexting testimony, including hearsay, sets our courts apart and frequently makes them harsh, inhuman, and impersonal. The culprit, according to Ralph Slovenko,4 professor of law and psychiatry, is the "opinion rule."5 According to the opinion rule, only established facts, stripped of all contexting background data, are admissible as evidence. How many times has the reader heard, "Answer the question, Yes or No." Such statements reveal the U.S. courts as the epitome of low-context systems. Those who are interested or well versed in the deeper significance of comparative law and who have a knack for recognizing patterns can get a feeling for other low-context systems by studying how the American legal system actually works, not how it is supposed to work.
One of the shortcomings of low-context systems, particularly in complex societies, is that as their mass increases they become unwieldy. Also, low-context systems are open to manipulation, for as it turns out, it is quite possible for the powerful to build the law that they want by systematically influencing precedent in widely scattered courts. Again, one needs the comparative backdrop of a high-context system to assess this statement properly, because HC systems are not subject to consciously manipulated precedent. Low-context systems do not afford equal treatment but favor those who can enlist the most articulate and skillful lawyers on their side. In addition, if these systems are to operate properly, they must have highly skilled, thoughtful jurists—people who are sufficiently intelligent and skeptical to bring context into the system—to find out what actually transpired, not just what the attorneys and witnesses said took place.6
In contrast, the French courts that I have known, the ones that deal with people's problems, allow great leeway in the testimony admitted as evidence. The court wants to find out as much as possible about the circumstances behind the surface acts that brought people before the bench. Everything is heard—fact, hearsay, gossip. The court wants to know what kind of human beings were involved (normally irrelevant prior to determination of guilt in an American court).7 In a word, the French trial is much higher-context than the United States trial. Paradoxically, the French system places power in the hands of the judge. This is consistent with other highly centralised aspects of French culture, but it removes an added source of contexting balance. In the United States, the law maybe LC but juries aren't.
Again, there is no intention to give the impression that one system is better than another, only that they are not only different but representative of the culture and consistent with everything else. It is possible, for example, for juries in the United States to circumvent the anti-contexting biases of the legal system in order to get at essential data, but it is less common than in France. The issue is only that the two systems are structured differently and therefore work differently.
In spite of the French legal system, which permits a certain give-and-take in trials, one discovers that in the culture at large the French are even more subject to the tyranny of bureaucrats than we are in the United States. But in France there is an added quality of involvement in life and with each other which is not common among white Americans. One sees this in business practice. However, many American businessmen have difficulty accepting the fact that French businessmen are very different from their American counterparts. The French as a rule are much more involved with their employees and with their customers and clients as well. They do not feel they can serve them adequately unless they know them well. Even today, in spite of a speeded-up world, once one has established a client or customer relationship in France, one can count on keeping the relationship for generations. The American "high pressure" salesmanship is the direct antithesis to the French. The result, of course, is that if there is an established market in France, Americans will encounter more resistance there than they are used to. One does not move in and win the French overnight.8
The Gauls have never been easy for the northern Europeans, the Americans, or the English to understand. The answer may be that French culture is a mixture, a mélange, of high- and low-context institutions and situations. It is not always possible for the foreigner to predict in what proportions they will be found or in what order they occur.
Even more difficult for Americans to fathom are the Japanese, whose language, customs, and dress have captivated and mystified Westerners ever since Commodore Perry's 1853 opening of Tokyo Bay. A friend of mine, a third-generation American-in-Japan who was bilingual in Japanese and English, used to keep a file of items that one must know if he is to function in Japan. My friend never stopped discovering new things; he added to the file almost every day. Japanese courts and law are especially strange to the Westerner, yet they are entirely functional in Japan.
A study of the trial in Japan also gives us appropriate and useful insights into one facet of Japanese culture. Normally, one hears very little about trials in other nations unless they are political. Trials are considered to be an internal matter concerning relations between the people and their government. However, in the early days of the U.S. occupation of Japan following World War II, the Western world had an unusual opportunity to observe Japanese courts in action, to get a glimpse of one of the important paradigms of Japanese behavior. In a move toward normal relations, a Status of Forces Agreement gave the Japanese the right to try United States citizens (including the military) for crimes committed against the Japanese. The inevitable occurred when an army private named Girard, while guarding spent artillery casings left over from practice firing, killed an old Japanese woman. The accident happened because the military had posted guards to prevent the Japanese from scavenging the brass casings. The guards, with nothing else to do, had invented a kind of game using the Japanese scavengers as pawns. Each day when artillery practice was over and the guards were posted, Japanese women would appear and start retrieving the brass casings. The GI guards, using grenade launchers attached to the muzzles of their rifles, would lob these same shell casings at the Japanese, who ducked and scattered as the spent shell casings whistled overhead or thudded into the ground beside them. Girard, an overzealous participant in the "scare the slant-eyes and watch them jump" game, managed to hit the old woman between the shoulder blades, breaking her back and killing her.
This was a clear-cut case for the Status of Forces Agreement. Girard had to be tried by a Japanese court. The Americans were convinced that Girard would be crucified. The case naturally attracted a lot of attention in the United States, where feeling in the press ran high. An American attorney was retained, and the trial finally got under way.
As reported in the press, Girard, instead of being contrite, acted more like a bantam rooster before a cockfight. He strutted and puffed out his chest, waved to the cameras, and clearly reveled in the limelight. Almost without exception, the American press fanned the flames of prejudice by exploiting the natural ignorance and fears of the American public. In a typically bipolar fashion, it was Us against Them.
The Japanese were dumfounded. How do you respond to someone who hasn't the remotest notion of how to behave in court and makes a mockery of your most sacred institutions? Their considered decision, after observing Girard's behavior during the trial and that of his counsel (who was also completely ignorant of either the importance or the subtleties of intercultural relations), was to wash their hands of the entire affair by declaring the accused innocent and asking the United States Government to repatriate Girard and never permit him to set foot on Japanese soil again.
The two systems (the American and the Japanese) exemplify high and low-context justice. The Japanese trial has an entirely different purpose from the American. Because of the inclusiveness of HC systems, it eschews the protagonist-antagonist conflict which characterizes the American court. Very high-context systems, by definition, take much more into account, and this has the effect of putting the accused, the court, the public, and those who are the injured parties on the same side, where, ideally, they can work together to settle things. The purpose of the trial is to provide a setting where the powers of government can act as a backdrop for a performance, where the consequences and the impact of the crime are played out before the accused. It also provides an opportunity for the accused to be properly and publicly repentant for disrupting the orderly processes of life, for releasing the evil of disorder by failing to observe the regulative norms expected of decent human beings. In a word, the function of the trial is to place the crime in context and present it in such a way that the criminal must see and understand the consequences of his act. It is crucial that the culprit exhibit a high degree of contrition. Girard's behavior, while gaining him brownie points at home, certainly was a deep, unmistakable affront to the Japanese.
Though he has long since been forgotten, Girard's case illustrates in almost classic form what happens when high- and low-context systems meet in the same setting, when the unspoken, unformulated, unexplicit rules governing how information is handled and how people interact and relate are at opposite ends of the context scale. There were, of course, both larger and smaller issues at stake in the Girard case. There were deep political and ethnocentric overtones. Unconsciously, the United States was still defeating the Japanese. To my knowledge, the question of why the United States officers who permitted the grenade launching game to continue were not brought to trial was never raised—another clue to low-context behavior. If the situation had been reversed, you can rest assured that a high Japanese general would have resigned and, in the old days, committed hara-kiri.
In case the reader is wondering about the difference between the French and the Japanese vis-à-vis context (since courts in both are higher in context than in the United States) , the difference is this: the entire French system is a mixture of high- and low-context situations. In Japan, the overall approach to life, institutions, government, and the law is one in which one has to know considerably more about what is going on at the covert level than in the West. It is very seldom in Japan that someone will correct you or explain things to you. You are supposed to know, and they get quite upset when you don't. Also, Japanese loyalties are rather concrete and circumscribed. You join a business firm and, in a larger sense, you belong to the Emperor. You owe each a debt that can never be repaid. Once a relationship is formed, loyalty is never questioned. What is more, you have no real identity unless you do belong.9 This does not mean that there aren't differences at all levels between people, ranging from the interpersonal to the national. It is just that differences are expressed and worked out differently. As in all HC systems, the forms that are used are important. To misuse them is a communication in itself.
Context, in one sense, is just one of many ways of looking at things. Failure to take contexting differences into account, however, can cause problems for Americans living in Japan, and even at times inconvenience the sheltered tourist. High-context cultures make greater distinctions between insiders and outsiders than low-context cultures do. People raised in high-context systems expect more of others than do the participants in low-context systems. When talking about something that they have on their minds, a high-context individual will expect his interlocutor to know what's bothering him, so that he doesn't have to be specific. The result is that he will talk around and around the point, in effect putting all the pieces in place except the crucial one. Placing it properly—this keystone—is the role of his interlocutor. To do this for him is an insult and a violation of his individuality.
Also in HC systems, people in places of authority are personally and truly (not just in theory) responsible for the actions of subordinates down to the lowest man. In LC systems, responsibility is diffused throughout the system and difficult to pin down—a point that President Nixon exploited in his Watergate defense. Paradoxically, when something happens to a low-context system, everyone runs for cover and "the system" is supposed to protect its members. If a scapegoat is needed, the most plausible low-ranking scapegoat is chosen. In the My Lai incident, a lieutenant took the rap.
Moving from law to literature, one again finds a tremendous resource—a stockpile of cultural data—albeit raw data which must be mined and refined before their meaning is clear. Japanese novels are interesting and sometimes puzzling for Westerners to read. To the uninitiated, much of the richness as well as great depths of meaning pass unnoticed, because the nuances of Japanese culture are not known. Nobelist Yasunari Kawabata provides some excellent examples. In Snow Country, the central character, Shimamura, has sought retreat from the pressures of life in a remote country inn, where he meets Komako, a prostitute. Even though Komako never declares her love to Shimamura, she doesn't have to. Only the Western reader might miss the intense passion of her love. In one scene, Komako, mumbling incomprehensible phrases about a party she has left, staggers drunkenly into Shimamura's room, gulps down some water, and staggers back to the party. To the Japanese, the scene is unforgettable, because Kawabata manages to make the reader sense that behind the curtain of Komako's incoherent mumbling lies feelings of a blazing, soul-consuming intensity.10
Discussing another of Kawabata's works, 'Sleeping Beauties," Donald Keene,11 a leading authority on Japan, makes a culture-contrasting point that captures the essence of high-context experiences. A portion of his description follows:
A man named Eguchi visits a house of pleasure reserved for men in their 60's and 70's. The men are provided with naked virgins who are drugged so heavily they cannot be awakened from sleep, and are warned by the proprietors of the establishment not to attempt any "mischief." Eguchi spends six nights lying beside six different girls. It is a triumph of Kawabata's virtuosity that he managed to make each of Eguchi's experiences entirely different, even though the six women do not utter a word or reveal anything about themselves but their nakedness. His thoughts as he lies beside these sleeping beauties take in all his life, especially his attachment to the young loveliness of women.

The Western mind boggles at the notion of a man seeking physically passive experiences night after night using the six beautiful, naked virgins only to release a succession of thoughts and memories. Again, in high-context situations, less is required to release the message. It is a sign of Kawabata's genius to use the drugged nakedness of woman to expose all that is in a man.
Anthropologist Weston La Barre12 has made significant contributions to our knowledge of man, not only by calling our attention to the fact that man evolves his extensions rather than his body, but in his observations of the 'human animal" in his natural habitat. One of these is quoted below because it aptly illustrates how much we take for granted even in the most mundane acts, such as "dunking" doughnuts.13
During the last War [WW II] there appeared in the North African edition of Stars and Stripes a news picture, purporting to portray an American GI teaching an Arab the gentle art of dunking doughnuts. The American is obviously much self-amused, and the whole context of the picture is "See how good Americans make friends with anybody in the world!" by teaching the foreigner a homely aspect of the American's own culture. But, protests the cultural anthropologist, is this what is actually happening here? Is the GI really teaching...the Arab all there is to know about doughnut-dunking? For doughnut-dunking also evokes Emily Post, a male vacation from females striving for vertical social mobility, Jiggs and Maggie, the revolt of the American he-man from "Mom" as the introject-source for manners in a neomatriarchate—and much else besides. Underlying it all is the classless American society—in which everyone is restlessly struggling to change his social status, 	by persuading others that he is a "good guy" and a good average nonconformist-conformist. Doughnut-dunking is all this—and more!

La Barre's commentary on one of the minor culture patterns of U.S. males is an excellent illustration of the fact that behind such apparently inconsequential acts as doughnut dunking, one finds the seeds of social unrest. High-context actions such as these could have been used to predict at least some of the energy and emotional power that lay behind the explosive rebellion of our youth a generation later, not only against Momism but all that they considered to be repressive of the individual's impulses. A generation ago, father figuratively thumbed his nose at his mom by dunking a doughnut. Today, his children overthrow the whole system of parental controls. Today, the dunking example seems ridiculously ineffectual and even timid. However, La Barre's point still holds, that one has to be properly contexted to correctly interpret everyday customs. The soldier who gets a secret bang out of soaking a common piece of pastry in his morning coffee can't tell you why he finds this simple act so psychologically gratifying. The more that lies behind his actions (the higher the context), the less he can tell you.
