Why Context?

Internal contexting makes it possible for human beings to perform the exceedingly important function of automatically correcting for distortions or omissions of information in messages. This mechanism was investigated by Richard and Roslyn Warren,1 a psychologist-zoologist team. The Warrens excised portions of words on recorded tape and replaced them with background sounds encountered in everyday life, such as a cough. Subjects listening to the tapes for the first time were unable to detect the excisions; they still actually "heard" the missing sounds and had difficulty localizing the cough. At first, the Warrens simply removed one sound—the central "s" in "legislatures,"2 used in a normal sentence. They were careful to remove enough of preceding and following sounds so as to eliminate transitional cues. Later, the Warrens eliminated an entire syllable—the "gis" in "legislatures," still used in a sentence—with the same result. Allowed to play the tape as many times as they liked, the subjects would maintain structural integrity of the word and still "hear" the missing syllable. In order to understand this experiment, the reader must visualize a subject using headphones, sitting in a room listening to tapes of sentences. The tapes are of normal conversations with normal background noises; subjects do not at first know that the tapes have been doctored, so they replace the missing sounds because their own auditory contexting processes (of which they are unaware) enable them to do so. Even more remarkable is that when told that a whole syllable was missing from a particular sentence, the subjects had difficulty localizing the cough and were unable to identify even the part of the sentence from which the syllable had been taken. The Warrens state:
Verbal context … can determine completely the synthesis of illusory speech sounds; phonemic restorations are heard when the context is clear but part of the stimulus is absent. Another illusion arises when the stimulus is clear and the context is absent. (italics added)

However, when a single word without context is repeated over a three-minute period, nothing remains constant—the average subject will hear approximately thirty changes, which involve six different forms. The same word after a time is no longer heard as the same word but several different words. The word "tress" repeated without pause and heard distinctly was soon transformed into "dress," "stress," "Joyce," "floris," "florist," and "purse."
In another, even more recent study of perception as a holistic function, Johnston and McClelland4 report in Science that subjects can perceive and identify a particular letter as part of a word more accurately than they can if the letter is by itself. They state: "The processing of any given stimulus letter must depend critically on the larger stimulus of which it is a part." The words COIN and JOIN were flashed briefly on a screen. It was possible for subjects to read the whole word more accurately and in a shorter time than the letters J and C when projected on the screen separately as single letters.
Contexting is apparently deeply embedded in processes governing the evolution of both the nervous system and the sensory receptors, particularly the eyes and the ears. In fact, it appears that one of the principal consequences of the evolution of the neocortex—the "new brain" that is so highly developed in man—has been to equip the human species so that man can detect and work with patterns to a greater degree than other life forms. This is not "intelligence" as it is measured by educators and psychologists, but an even more basic skill needed by all normal people. Pattern-recognizing ability is what makes it possible to tell that ÃÂâAaÀà are all variants of the same symbol; or to read handwriting that bears only a casual relationship to the standard graphemes used in script; and why it is possible to understand people who have lost important parts of the speech apparatus such as the tongue. If human beings were unable to detect and work with patterns, it is doubtful if complex life could have evolved.
Organisms lower on the phylogenetic scale than man are more easily fooled by mimicry, which is the antithesis of the contexting process. In fact, nature is full of examples of species preyed upon by others who have developed camouflage or other features to outwit the predator. This in turn pushes the compensatory capacity to penetrate camouflage. An example is the several species of hawkmoth that exhibit spots on their wings that look like owls' eyes when disturbed. Mimicry in nature is legion. For example, wasps are very unpleasant eating for birds, because they taste bitter; hence, many insects protectively copy the black-and-yellow markings of wasps.5 Fly fishermen all know that the flies they tie do not have to imitate the fish's food exactly. They only have to reproduce those features that the fish employs to identify its food. Along this same line, an important set of studies, under the direction of Warren S. McCulloch6 of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which have been devoted to identifying the information sent to the brain by the eye, reveal that the frog is quite easily fooled because of its low-context visual system. Anything that is within a certain size range, is dark, and moves, is going to be treated as a fly by the frog. Live but anesthetized flies that don't move do not get eaten, while the burned head of a match or any small, dark object placed on the edge of a revolving disk will be ingested immediately by any frog within range. As one moves up the phylogenetic scale, more and more contexting (hence greater pattern-recognition capacity) is built into the whole visual apparatus, not only the eye but the brain as well.
Gouras and Bishop7 have reported on the neural circuitry of the retina as it changes in response to increased needs for information as life forms evolve. They state:
The differences between various vertebrate retinas are not due to new types of synapses but different proportions of the same types, and these differences become most apparent in the output of the retina, the ganglion cells. Ganglion cells of lower order vertebrates are more specific in their stimulus requirements than are those of higher vertebrates. The more specialized a cell becomes, the less potential information it carries, so that by delaying the process of specialization until the more central nervous system—where more nerve cells are available—higher vertebrates gain the advantage of extracting more features from the external world.

By delaying the specialization of stimulus requirements of ganglion cells as they evolve, animals are also less easily fooled and as a consequence have enhanced their survival chances.
Man's visual apparatus enables him to see simultaneously in many different ways, and this is why the eye has yet to be mechanically replicated. The central portion of the retina has two parts or areas. The fovea—which sees with incredible precision—is a small, almost microscopic dot containing some twenty thousand color-sensitive cones, each with its own neuron. Surrounding the fovea is a lozenge-shaped structure, also highly sensitive to color, called the macula. The macula sees clearly but not as sharply as the fovea. It apparently performs a sort of contexting function for foveal vision.
As one moves outward from the center of the retina, the proportion of rods (color-blind cells) to cones (color-sensitive cells) changes. So does the way in which the cells are attached to their respective neurons. The rods increase and are attached in series to single neurons, which has the effect of magnifying movement in the peripheral field. This is an important survival mechanism, since it enabled primitive man to detect danger on either side and is still important in keeping track of speeding automobiles in parallel lanes when driving on today's freeways. The movement-detecting function, however, is only one of the many performed by peripheral vision. At night, rods are more light-sensitive than the cones. Hence, as was discovered during World War II blackouts, it is possible to navigate in the dark using the ultra-light-sensitive rods. Since the central portion of the eye is less light-sensitive than the periphery, a person must try not to look directly at anything at night. If he does, he will not see what he is looking at. When using night vision correctly, one navigates almost entirely by context. It takes time, but as those who have done it know, it is possible to fill in the details from context and memory. Peripheral vision also enables us to find and then fixate with the fovea even very small objects such as a tiny airplane in a large sky. To get a notion of what it is like to do without peripheral vision, try looking through a tube for an hour or so.
Like all mechanical extensions, most photographs and all TV images are low-context. Pictures taken through lenses give a macular view of things.8 One of the consequences is that the viewer never knows what's going on off camera. This makes it possible to trick him, as in the case with all low-context systems, like the trout going after the fisherman's lure.
Even though a great deal is known about the human visual system, there are still not only popular misconceptions about how that system works, but large areas of ignorance and controversy as well. Moving on from the form, function, and evolution of man's visual systems and keeping in mind what was said earlier about auditory contexting, it is interesting to note how modern science has developed both high-context (rare) and low-context systems and how taxonomies (classification systems) seem to fall into the high- and low-context patterns.
Science and taxonomy go hand in glove. In fact, implicit in every taxonomy is a theory of the nature of the events or organisms being classified. Yet a review of the historical development of taxonomy of living things reveals that, paradoxically, the more Western man classifies, the less useful are his classificatory systems. Folk taxonomies9 and scientific taxonomies are examples of high- and low-context systems, respectively. For example, in a recent article on the subject, the authors state:10
… the taxonomic system we use appears to communicate a great deal about the organism being discussed, whereas in fact it communicates very little. Since, in the vast majority of instances, only the describer has seen the named organism, no one with whom he is communicating shares his understanding of it.

In contrast, folk taxonomies perform entirely different functions and are designed not for information retrieval but for communicating about organisms with those who already know culturally significant properties of the organisms being discussed. The authors further state:
In dealing with the vast numbers of organisms that exist, we tend to overemphasize the process of classification and the decisions it involves at the expense of the information about the organisms… . ( italics added)

In other words, modern classification methods provide man with a lot of information that is difficult to integrate into a usable, intelligible pattern. This is a classic example of low-context information. What is more, millions of man-hours have gone into the classification of the million or more species now on record. The classification system cannot handle the vast numbers now involved. A new paradigm is clearly needed.
The reader may well ask how classification systems are relevant to our subject. The classification system is an excellent example of how the majority of Western peoples have been trained to think. Since the days of Linnaeus, the system has been highly respected and occupies a prestigious niche in the edifice of Western thought. Things could not have developed in any other way. The result has been, however, that whichever way we Westerners turn, we find ourselves deeply preoccupied with specifics (remember the neurons in the eye), to the exclusion of everything else. This is true today of our four main institutions, which absorb most of the energy and talent of this country: business, government (including defense), science, and education. Even the ecologists, who should know better, are frequently in dispute because each of the leading figures thinks he has a corner on the truth. The questions that must be answered are: "Where do we go for the overview? Who is putting things together? Who are the experts in the high-context integrative systems? Who knows how to make the type of observations necessary to build integrative systems of thought that will tell us where we stand?
We must not only learn how to integrate the two or more systems of observation, but have the courage to underwrite contextual thinking and contextual research. Switching things around will not be easy, because scientific institutions and the committees that referee research grants are set up to deal with and evaluate past research and are miserably equipped to evaluate future research or anything that does not fit the linear paradigms of Western science. To be a recognized HC thinker, one has to be an Einstein or an Albert Szent-Györgyi. Nobelist Szent-Györgyi11 classifies the two types according to an old Greek system: Apollonian, "which tends to develop established lines to perfection" (LC), and Dionysian, which is more apt to open new lines of research (HC). He says:
These are not merely academic problems. They have most important corollaries and consequences. The future of humankind depends upon the progress of science, and the progress of science depends on the support it can find. Support mostly takes the form of grants, and the present methods of distributing grants unduly favors the Apollonian. Applying for a grant begins with writing a project. The Apollonian clearly sees the future lines of his research and has no difficulty writing a clear project. Not so the Dionysian, who knows only the direction in which he wants to go out into the unknown; he has no idea what he's going to find there and how he's going to find it. Defining the unknown or writing down the subconscious is a contradiction in absurdum… . A great deal of conscious or self-conscious thinking must precede a Dionysian's observations: ……

A Dionysian scientist must be deeply contexted in his work before he even writes a proposal. Szent-Györgyi goes on to state that in order to get research grants he had to lie about what he intended to do, make up proposals he knew would be acceptable. He states:
… while earlier all of my faked projects were always accepted, since I can write down honestly what I think I will do my applications have been invariably rejected.

Continuing in this vein, he states:
… sitting in an easy chair I can cook up anytime a project which must seem quite attractive, clear, and logical. But if I go out into nature, into the unknown, to the fringes of knowledge, everything seems mixed up and contradictory, illogical and incoherent. This is what research does; it smooths out contradiction, makes things simple, logical, and coherent. So when I bring reality into my projects, they seem hazy and are rejected. The reviewer, feeling responsibility for the "taxpayers' money," justly hesitates to give money for research, the lines of which are not clear to the applicant himself.
A discovery must be, by definition, at variance with existing knowledge. During my lifetime, I have made two. Both were rejected offhand by the popes of the field.

A footnote to this discussion is Holden's12 report on the growing feelings of futility and self-doubt among psychologists which she found at a recent meeting of the American Psychological Association. Few psychologists felt that their work was relevant, so perhaps there is still hope for the Dionysian.
There is a paradox in investigating high-context behavioral responses with low-context methods. In fact, the Warrens (referred to earlier) set out neither to investigate nor to demonstrate the role of context in recognition or in the determination of meaning. The results in this case were strictly fortuitous. I would predict, however, that if one could get behind the scenes one would find context-dependent results in the majority of research projects. I would venture that findings of this sort do not get reported as frequently as they might, simply because in most Western science, striving for replicability and rigor in methods is conducted with a view to eliminating context. This is in spite of the fact that there are as models such men as Szent-Györgyi and the brilliant pathologist Dubos,13 both of whom saw through the fallacy of the usual, Apollonian procedures. Dubos made his reputation by demonstrating that micro-organisms raised in sterile, replicable laboratory environments were not the same organisms but were totally different from those having to meet the challenges of a normal, complex environment. In a sense, what is being discussed is a variation on the physicist Heisenberg's principle of uncertainty, which demonstrates that even in the world of molecular physics the act of observation alters everything.
As one moves from the physicist's world of subatomic particles to living substance, one observes that things become even more uncertain and even less predictable as one ascends the phylogenetic scale. The essence of living substance is uncertainty. If uncertainty were taken seriously, the effect on research methods used in the investigation of complex life forms would be unmistakable. Clearly, the less predictable the performance and the more involvement there is between observer and observed—such as creating entire experimental situations14—the more attention must be paid not only to observation but to accuracy and adequacy of description.
Returning to the previous comments concerning the scarcity of comprehensive models, again the field of psychology comes to mind. One does not have to listen for long to hear the complaint that psychology has no comprehensive theoretical model except B. F. Skinner's15 mechanistic interpretations of Pavlov's behaviorism. Skinner is comprehensive in a single, restricted sense because he reduces behavior to one set of explanations. Following Watson, he holds that everything that man does is determined by his environment. Yet many dislike Skinner's theories, because they are so narrow. It is typical of our culture that we have no way of reconciling or including in one frame of reference such divergent views as Freudian psychoanalysis and Skinnerian environmental determinism. We act as though one or the other had to be right, when in fact both work and are relevant when placed in proper perspective. The integration of these two approaches is something behavioral scientists must learn to live with.
Fortunately, some of what is needed is already known.
For example, it appears that when one is faced with a high-context system, as in Japan, the power of the system is such that new situations can be learned only if they are approached technically and in the greatest detail. Those of us in the West who are used to having to struggle with the complexities of LC systems can, when we are confronted with something new, be quite creative about it and not require an inordinate amount of detailed programming. HC people can be creative within their own system but have to move to the bottom of the context scale when dealing with anything new, whereas LC people can be quite creative and innovative when dealing with the new but have trouble being anything but pedestrian when working within the bounds of old systems. To all of this there are limits and exceptions, but it is often necessary in an intercultural situation for the LC person to have to go into much more detail than he is used to when he is dealing with HC people. (Remember the example of the GI's stationed in Japan during the Occupation who had to specify the color of the polish to be used when they sent their shoes out to be shined.) If the LC person interacting with a high-context culture does not really think things through and try to foresee all contingencies, he's headed for trouble.
It is easier to foresee trouble or coming confrontations in LC cultures than HC cultures, because in the LC culture the bonds that tie people together are somewhat fragile, so that people move away or withdraw if things are not going well. In the HC culture, according to anthropologist Francis Hsu16 and others, because the bonds between people are so strong there is a tendency to allow for considerable bending of the system. When the explosion comes, it is likely to come without warning. When the boundaries are overstepped, they must be overstepped so far that there is no turning back. It is sheer folly to get seriously involved with HC cultures unless one is really contexted. This is the danger that the West faces in its dealings with the East, particularly in view of our State Department's head-in-the-sand attitude toward Chinese culture.
While the principle described here applies to the full range of human transactions, from individuals to business to governments, we can only sketch in the basic patterns, because we have not had much experience in looking at cultures in terms of how they structure the information/context equation. While there is a significant difference, one can only guess what the total implications are.
