Situation
Culture's Building Block

There are hundreds if not thousands of different situational frames in cultures as complex as our own. These frames are made up of situational dialects, material appurtenances, situational personalities, and behavior patterns that occur in recognized settings and are appropriate to specific situations. Some common settings and situations are: greeting, working, eating, bargaining, fighting, governing, making love, going to school, cooking and serving meals, hanging out, and the like. The situational frame is the smallest viable unit of a culture that can be analyzed, taught, transmitted, and handed down as a complete entity. Frames contain linguistic, kinesic, proxemic, temporal, social, material, personality, and other components.
The framing concept is important not just because it provides the basis for identifying analytic units that are manageable when put in the hands of the expert, but framing can be useful when learning a new culture. In addition, framing will ultimately be the basis upon which towns and buildings are planned in the future. Frames represent the materials and contexts in which action occurs—the modules on which all planning should be based. Learning a new subject or gaining control of a new culture is greatly facilitated if one restricts oneself to natural frames as they occur and does not attempt to go beyond them. The point is subtle but important and one that has been demonstrably successful in overcoming some of the antediluvian methods in the teaching of foreign languages, for example. Pioneering work in this field was successfully carried out at such places as the Foreign Service Institute of the U. S. Department of State.
In contrast to the situational approach, traditional language learning and unfortunately much of current practice simply reproduce the methods used when the instructor himself was a student. His paradigm is common in the Western world and permeates the teaching field. The student is presented with parts and asked to combine them according to rules which are memorized. For some reason, people reared in the European tradition feel more comfortable if they have a rule to fall back on, even if it doesn't fit. This is important, because people who depend on rules and authorities in order to act are slow to experience the reality of another system. Projecting what they have been told in the past, they fit the world into their own model.
Examples and principles from linguistics will serve to illustrate this point:
When an American tries to use his high school French in France, he can neither understand nor be understood. People just don't speak the way he was taught. This is because the rules for language learning, promulgated by some distant, forgotten authority and passed down to the current generation with little change by a more recent authority are almost invariably wrong.1
People don't learn to perform by combining parts which are memorized according to rules which they must think about in the course of the transaction, whether it is a new language one is learning, or skiing, or spotting enemy planes in wartime. The process is too slow and too complex. Besides, people learn in gestalts—complete units—which are contexted in situations and can be recalled as wholes.
Each culture is not only an integrated whole but has its own rules for learning. These are reinforced by different patterns of overall organization. An important part of understanding a different culture is learning how things are organized and how one goes about learning them in that culture. This is not possible if one persists in using the learning models handed down in one's own culture.
The reason one cannot get into another culture by applying the "let's-fit-the-pieces-together" process is the total complexity of any culture. In the West, we cling to the notion that there is such a thing as "the" English language or "the" French language, or "the" Spanish culture or "the" Navajo culture. The "the" model is oversimplified. It does not do justice to either language or culture. Ultimately, use of the model can only lead to frustration, because there is little in language or culture that can be pinned down the way many would like.

These facts were brought home to me several years ago, when my wife (who works with me) and I were asked to evaluate some of the English language tests that were being administered to foreigners in preparation for coming to the United States for various types of training. The theory was that the foreign trainees would need to speak, read, and write English. Therefore, it was decided that before embarking on a training program in this country they should be tested for English competency. It sounds logical enough. The trouble was that those who passed tests given overseas all too frequently were unable to understand what was going on when they were placed in actual classes in the United States or when they had to interact with their American instructors. In fact, they could not communicate in English in even the most basic and simplest situations.
Part of the problem lay in the fact that there is no such thing as a basic form of the language that is universally applicable.
During our studies, we concluded that people anywhere in the world master hundreds of what we came to call "situational dialects" which are used in specific situational frames, none of which is the language taught in the classroom. More important, the classroom is the only place where the classroom form of the language will be found.2 It is a monument to the human intellect that it has been able to overcome the handicap of classroom instruction and move into the living language.
Ordering meals in restaurants represents a class of situational dialects (SD) of moderate complexity, depending upon the circle the speaker travels in as well as on how much of a gourmet he happens to be. If he eats ordinary food or frequents lunch counters in larger American cities, a few properly placed words will do. But if he wants to swing with the Jet Set and be at ease with the maître d'hotel at the Ritz, Maxim's, or La Pyramide, he will need a whole new arsenal of terms as well as strategies and plans for their use.
Properly used, situational frames are relatively high context. This facilitates and simplifies matters and makes it possible to take advantage of what the other person already knows. However, one must have been given the proper expressions to use in the appropriate contexts, for the situational dialect immediately identifies the speaker as one who belongs, one who is an insider, not an outsider, and therefore as one who knows how the system works. This applies even to such simple situations as boarding a bus or buying a railroad ticket. It is possible for the neophyte to observe and learn the SD from the habitual customer or passenger, as these transactions occur with great speed and little effort. "Two first to Land's End returning" is all that is needed. None of this business about "Would you please sell me two round-trip tickets, first-class, to Land's End for today?" The language used between pilots and control-tower personnel is an excellent example of a very high-context SD, developed in response to the need for a language of great parsimony and low ambiguity. The use of this language is admittedly limited, but to those who know it, it fits the pattern to a T. Situational dialects of these types frequently make use of restricted codes—and remember, restricted codes are for the insider. Everything is condensed: grammar, vocabulary, intonation. All the rules that are so carefully learned in the classroom go right out the window.
What the neophyte or outsider needs to know is: What do I say and what do I communicate by my posture, intonation, gestures, and clothing in this particular situation? He also must be able to read his interlocutor's speech as well as his behavior, regardless of whether he is of the culture or a foreigner. New situations require the learning of new situational dialects—for example, meeting the new in-laws when class or ethnicity is different. In fact, anything that one does for the first time.3
At times, the new SD is simply a consequence of joining a new organization. Twenty years ago, I had a job in a research training satellite of an East Coast university. The organization was staffed by two types of people—Ph.D. professors and young women secretaries who kept the place running. I was barely ensconced in my office when I began to pick up some of the tensions. The academicians clearly ranked the women much lower than themselves, while the women felt that many of the obsessions with accuracy and form in written material were narcissistically motivated and unnecessary. My sympathies were with the women. So it was therefore puzzling to me when I noticed that they began acting toward me in away that verged on being fresh or rude. I wondered what I had done to elicit such behavior. They were still being polite and pleasant to the regular professional staff. Fortunately, the secretary I had brought with me was deeply contexted in a variety of speech and behavior as well as being a more relaxed human being than I. She translated for me. "The girls like you, you ninny. You are the only one around here who treats them like human beings."
In one sense, the notion of situational behavior in speech is not new. Savants ranging from Socrates to Peter Drucker4 have stressed the necessity of speaking to people in their own language. But one should not only speak to people in their language but in situations with which they are familiar and feel at ease, and which are appropriate to the transaction. Easier said than done, but not all that difficult either, once people accustom themselves to the idea that what makes another individual uncomfortable may not be the result of specific design on the part of the speaker as it is incorrect situational usage. The bus driver, the counterman, and the man in the control tower all appreciate it if you use their particular SD properly.
Faking an SD on the job is another matter. In fact, it can be a form of condescension and frequently has a phony quality unless it was actually learned on the job, as with a man who has worked his way up through the ranks and become president. He is still one of the boys when he wants to be, and uses the situational dialect to indicate how he defines the situation. He is one of the boys when he wants to be, Mr. Smith at other times. People can understand this because his use of the SD is a communication about a communication.
Situational behavior appears to be basic to all vertebrates. No one knows how far down the phylogenetic scale situational behavior can be traced. Possibly it extends as far as single-celled organisms which have active and passive phases, times when they conjugate and when they divide, when behavior alters. It does appear, however, that complexity of the situational inventory is a function of evolution. Play, for example, does not emerge as an identifiable activity below the level of birds and mammals. Play is readily observed in mammals, particularly the young. Though Lorenz5 claims to have observed jackdaws playing, the difference between play and non-play in birds is more difficult for humans to distinguish than in mammals. However, people do buy "toys" for parakeets, and while there may be an element of anthropomorphism here, the aerobatics of ravens that I have seen in the mountains is a form of play.
Anyone with any experience of animals (even laboratory animals) knows that animals will exhibit a repertoire of species-specific behaviors with accompanying hormonal changes (as with females in heat). These behaviors are frequently associated with specific psychological states as well as specific time and spaces. The hungry animal looking for food or eating is different from one with a full stomach. The animal in the middle of an active sexual cycle exhibits different behavior from one whose sexual drive has subsided. Other "basic archetypical situations" (BAS) are: birth, death, hierarchical behaviors (dominance and submission), agonistic or aggressive behavior, play, territorial behavior, teaching and learning, and various types of communicative behavior.6
The suppression of and failure to recognize man's situational needs in the Western world has resulted in untold distortions in the way we live, the meaning we attach to life, and how our personalities develop. Take the sex drive, which lies behind a basic archetypical situation. Without the repression of sex, the aberrations of behavior that led to Freud's theories would not have occurred. Today, there has been a swing in the opposite direction. Sex, instead of remaining situational in character, insinuates itself into everything from the packaging of presidents to automobiles. Play, another BAS, is now pursued like work and turns into a multibillion-dollar industry in the United States, with the result that few white middle-class Americans know how to really play. The effect that this has had on our daily lives and our politics is incalculable—we take ourselves much too seriously.
Consider time. While the time system in American culture has not been developed to the extremes that one finds in Switzerland and Germany, time is the dominant organizing principle in the culture. Time started as a natural series of rhythms associated with daily, monthly, and annual cycles. It is now imposed as an outside constraint and sends its tentacles into every nook and crevice of even our most private acts (bowel movements and sex are regulated by the clock and the calendar). As many of the young have discovered, our time system has done much to alienate Western man from himself. A reason for people getting sick is to escape the shackles of time and to return and re-experience their own rhythms, but at what price!
In The Silent Language, as well as Chapter 1 of this volume, I described some different time systems developed by other cultures. If there is anything that can change the character of life, it is how time is handled. Time is not a "mere convention," as some English anthropologists would lead us to believe, but one of the most basic organizing systems of life, for all situational behavior has a temporal and spatial (proxemic) dimension.
In discussing time in the West, it is important not to forget that, without schedules, industrial society would be unknown. Dependence on time as an organizing system can be traced to the need to co-ordinate when transportation was relatively slow. Now the electronic revolution not only makes for simultaneous diffusion of events throughout the world but the storage of events on video tape so that they can be viewed at any time, and there is no longer the pressure for a time strait-jacket. The assembly line, which has been viewed for years as an antihuman abomination eliciting nothing but anomie, resentment, and boredom, is finally in the process of being slowly altered. The problem has been what to do about it. Fortunately, industry on its own initiative is beginning to consult workers for solutions. In Sweden, auto workers in teams now assemble an entire motor. In other plants, both abroad and in the United States, efforts are being made to switch people around in order to vary not only the job but the rhythm as well.
Aggression and territoriality have received a good deal of attention these days—too much attention. The point is not that man is or is not aggressive. Man, like other animals, is situationally aggressive; but, unlike other species, he handles and channels aggression in many different ways depending upon his culture and how it structures and integrates aggression. The Hopi of Arizona, who live crowded together on their mesas, will tell the white man that they are not aggressive, they are the Peaceful People—this is their ideal. However, when one gets to know them, as I did in living and working with them for a number of years, it is evident that aggression among the Hopi has been dissociated. They are brought up in the belief that it is bad to be aggressive and do not seem to experience their aggression, if we are to believe what they tell us. Yet, evidences of aggression keep cropping up among the Hopi like locusts burrowing their way through asphalt. The town of Awatovi, the easternmost village, was destroyed and the inhabitants murdered by their Hopi neighbors. New Oraibi exists because of a factional split in Old Oraibi. So do Moencopi, Bakavi, Polacca, and other villages at the foot of the mesas. Gossip and slander are a form of aggression which are endemic among the Hopi. My own theory is that the Hopi had to put the lid on aggression because they were crowded in incredibly close quarters on the mesa. (The whole First Mesa, housing three villages, appears to have less space than the deck of a single aircraft carrier.) All of this the Hopi probably could have tolerated if they were not the possessors of an unusually rigid and unyielding culture, one in which there is very little freedom to deviate from cultural norms. Thus, the Hopi are both physically and psychically crowded in their mesa-top towns. Open aggression would tear the place apart, so they simply repress it.
Extreme crowding can be tolerated if everyone behaves, talks, thinks, and feels according to the dictates of a common pattern. Cultural and social rigidity can be hard on people, because humankind is the most diverse species on earth, but it is apparently necessary under crowded conditions. Aggression springing from differences can be dangerous when living in close quarters. In such circumstances, man's energies must be turned to channeling aggression so that it is not continually being triggered. How this is done is illustrated in the life of some of America's Indians. Prior to the time when the white man killed off the buffalo and rounded up the more nomadic Indians, the Plains Indians, living with vast spaces around them, recognized and institutionalized a modified form of aggression in their warfare. They could afford it then, but not now.
One sees evidence of the restricting nature of situational behavior in another minority group, the mentally ill. This was illustrated in a report in Science.7 The author, Rosenhan, and his colleagues presented themselves to twelve mental hospitals in five different states on both coasts. This group of sane scientists simply told the admissions personnel that they heard voices uttering words like "thud," "empty," and "hollow." Otherwise, everything the scientists did and said, including their case histories, was true. In all cases, hearing voices was sufficient cause for admission. Once inside, regardless of their behavior, Rosenhan and his group were judged insane and treated accordingly. The mere fact that they were patients in the actual situation of a mental hospital was enough to distort every perception of the hospital staff. There is no such thing as a patient independent and separate from his hospital situation.
Man is not innately and solely aggressive or cooperative or loving or sexual or hard-working or playful or hierarchical or territorial or bound by time or competitive or materialistic or scholarly or communicative. He is all of these things but usually emphasizes only one or two at a time.
Not only is man situationally loving, hard-working, hierarchical, etc., but different individuals seem to be endowed with different proportions of these traits: some are more active, others more energetic, or more social, or more communicative than others. However, if these traits are suppressed by the situational inventories of the culture, this can lead to trouble of a deep, ill-defined nature, like a plant potted in the wrong soil.
This brings us to the convergence of psychiatry (particularly psychoanalysis) and anthropology. The two fields overlap in the study of how man's situational needs are structured, handled, sublimated, repressed, suppressed, experienced, and exploited. An improper balance leads to neurosis; denial of man's nature, to psychosis.
No culture I know or have read about has developed a perfect balance of man's situational needs. This is due in part to the fact that man domesticated himself with very little knowledge of his own basic nature. Some cultures seem to have done better than others at domesticating their members, but whether this is true is impossible to determine. To my knowledge, no comparative studies have been made as to how well man satisfies his basic situational needs in different cultural settings.
Following World War II there was a spate of interest in man's "basic needs." Very little came from a needs approach because of the overriding influence of culture on needs. The fact that so many social scientists were attracted to a needs approach is indicative that there was something there, but we were simply not able to deal with it given the conceptual models available at the time. About the same time, a study of "values" was also fashionable in anthropology, and values studies received extensive and generous support from the foundations. Unfortunately, the study of values is a little like studying vocabulary without reference to grammar, etc. You can learn something, much of it interesting but also at times trivial unless of course the lists of values are so extensive as to provide the basis for a pattern analysis.
The study of situational behavior—basic, archetypal, and derived—differs from both the needs and values studies in that it focuses on a total situation that is made up of elements from all the primary message systems, follows the pattern laws of order, selection, and congruence, and is part of a transaction—that is, where there is feedback. In other words, a situation is a complete entity, just as a sentence is a complete entity. Situational frames are the building blocks of both individual lives and institutions and are the meeting point of: the individual and his psychic makeup, institutions ranging from marriage to large bureaucracies, and culture, which gives meaning to the other two.
In these terms it is interesting to note that Sullivan defined personality in situational terms. An almost overwhelming task lies ahead to classify situational frames and the way in which they build up into larger wholes. Man has had very little experience with this sort of analysis, and I for one have no notion where it will lead us.
