Action Chains

Borrowed from ethology, the action chain is closely linked conceptually to the situational frame. An action chain is a set sequence of events in which usually two or more individuals participate. It is reminiscent of a dance that is used as a means of reaching a common goal that can be reached only after, and not before, each link in the chain has been forged. Like frames, action chains can be simple, complex, or derived. Every action within a frame has a beginning, a climax, and an end, and comprises a number of intermediate stages. If any of the basic acts are left out or are too greatly distorted, the action must be started all over again. Making breakfast, meeting a friend, becoming engaged, buying something in a store, writing a poem or a book, are all examples of action chains of varying complexity.
There are practical reasons for studying action chains, some of which are particularly relevant to the tasks of the architect and the planner. Thus, research in how space is used reveals that failure to get detailed data on the action chains and the situational frames in which they occur can result in breaking the chain. This happens when architectural spaces don't fit the activities they house. Crowding is so devastating in its consequences not because it is inherently bad, but because it results in disorganization and disruption of action chains. For those who remember Calhoun's experiments with rats,1 progressively increased crowding resulted in seriously disrupted nest building, courting, and care of the young, all of which represent action chains.
In order to review for the reader the concept of the AC, a description of a well-known simple sequence that has been studied at length by Tinbergen2 is paraphrased below from one of my earlier books:
Phase A
Steps
1–4

In the spring, each male stickleback [a fish of the family Gasterosteidae] (1) carves out a circular territory, (2) defends it several times against all comers, (3) and builds a nest. (4) His inconspicuous, gray coloring then changes, so that his chin and belly are bright red, his back blue-white, and his eyes blue. The change in coloration serves to attract females and repel males.

Phase B
Steps
5–10

When a female, her belly swollen with eggs, comes within range of the sticklebacks nest, (5) the male zigzags toward her, alternately displaying his face and colorful profile. The two-step ceremony must be repeated several times before (6) the female will follow the male and enter the nest. Shifting the visual mode of communication to the more basic one of touch, (7) the male with his nose rhythmically prods the female at the base of her spine until she lays her eggs. (8) The male then enters the nest and fertilizes the eggs, and (9) drives the female away. (10) He repeats this sequence until four or five females have deposited eggs in his nest.

Phase C
Steps
11–15

(11) At this point the mating impulse subsides, and a new set of responses is observed. (12) The male becomes his old, inconspicuous gray. (13) His role now is to defend the nest and (14) keep the eggs supplied with oxygen by fanning water through the nest with his pectoral fins. (15) When the eggs hatch, the male protects the young fish until they are big enough to fend for themselves. He will even catch those that wander too far, carrying them in his mouth carefully back to the nest.


Niko Tinbergen, the Dutch ethologist who first studied the stickleback, notes that the male's zigzag approach to the female is a slightly inhibited urge to attack which must run its course before the sexual urge can emerge. It is the egg-swollen shape of the female that releases the courting response in the male. When she is heavy with eggs, the color red attracts her; once the eggs are laid, this is no longer the case. Yet she will not lay eggs until prodded by the male. Because the sequence is so predictable, Tinbergen was able to conduct several experiments in crowding and its relation to action chains. Too many males meant too many territories too close together and, as a consequence, too many defenses of territory, to the point that there was such disruption that males were even killed on occasion. Too much red in the environment disrupted the courting sequence and broke the chain, so that important steps were omitted. Eggs were not laid in the nest, and if they were laid, were not fertilized. The response to crowding in this instance was identical to that of Calhoun's crowded rats.
On the human level, one finds comparable action chains. In fact, I seriously doubt if man does anything of a social nature that does not involve action drains. Some ACs are incredibly long, requiring more than a lifetime to be played out, while others last only a few seconds.
One example of a short action chain would be shaking hands. One person extends his hand. The hand is taken and the correct grip found—the amount of pressure that is applied in the United States is arrived at by a complex series of extraordinarily rapid responses controlled by feedback from the pressure applied by the other party. There are exceptions, of course—those individuals (usually male) who oversimplify the process, reducing it to a kind of contest of strength. The duration of the shake and the terminal breakaway are determined by situational factors independent of the actual handshake: the degree of eye contact and mutual responses of warmth or lack of it, all of which can transpire in less than ten seconds.
All planning, if it is realistic and not of the armchair variety, constitutes and must take into account an elaborate hierarchy of action chains. Planning that is not thought of in this way is static and doomed to miss the mark.
Action chains represent transactions in the sense that Dewey and the transactional psychologists use the term. These can be divided roughly into three basic categories:
Transactions with the inanimate environment and man's extensions, ranging from preparing a meal to building a house, a huge dam, or even a whole city.
Transactions with living things, including plants, animals, and other human beings.
Intrapsychic transactions involving the various parts of one's psyche. In Freudian terms, there are transactions between the id, the ego, and the superego as well as between life and death wishes, for example. Or, if one is a follower of Harry Stack Sullivan,3 there are the in-awareness and dissociated aspects of one's personality; i.e., behavior that is consciously experienced as contrasted with that which is experienced only indirectly. Intrapsychic transactions occur in the context of both the first two categories, and since man spends considerable time rolling things over in his mind, transactions can occur in which the contexts are illusory (imagined).

The reader, at this point, should be reminded that the division of nature into inanimate and animate and intrapsychic realms is strictly the product of Western European thinking. Other cultures carve up the universe differently.
The Hopi, for example, should have no difficulty recognizing the transactional nature of dealing with plants and animals, for they talk to their crops and their sheep and to all growing things, just as they talk to their children so that they will grow and develop properly.4 The Hopi tell us that they cannot conceive of anything growing and flourishing except with love, care, and encouragement. In addition, their use of time used to be and probably still is very, very different from that of the white man. The Europeans who inhabited the North American continent imposed their time system on everything, organic and inorganic alike. Whites have concrete notions concerning books, houses, dams, office buildings, etc., all of which have scheduled times for completion, just as children are supposed to walk and talk and go to school at certain ages. For the Hopi, every living thing has its own inherent time system; tasks concerned with man's material nonliving extensions therefore have no inherent schedule. Hence, the Hopi feel no compulsion to complete certain jobs within a specified time.
When I was working with the Hopi in the 1930s as a construction foreman, the fact that the white man had schedules for all sorts of projects that the Hopi did not, caused considerable tension. Construction projects such as dams were scheduled to be completed in a given length of time. The Hopi could not understand why they were always being needled to hurry things up and why it was that a dam should be built in any set length of time. Today, of course, some forty years later, things undoubtedly have changed. At the time I am referring to, a house could have taken twenty years to build.
Carlos Castaneda's5 Yaqui sorcerer of Sonora does not between the three categories of transactions, but lumps them all into one. To him, man cannot be separated from nature. He conducts his transactions according to an elaborate system of knowledge in which detailed information is required concerning the specific habits, attributes, and characteristics of plants, animals, and people, all of whom fall into categories that are either suitable or unsuitable for a particular person to deal with. A given individual may have to avoid one of the categories of magic, and all the plants and animals as well as the knowledge associated with that magic. Hunters relate to one cluster of living substance, while men of knowledge have another set. It is important for the Yaqui man of knowledge to control the forces in himself and the forces in nature and to balance these forces intelligently. Man has a personal relationship with everything. What one needs from life is power, but that power can be used or find its way only in certain directions, which are set by the karma of the particular individual.
Like many of the things we have discussed, action chains can be arranged along a continuum ranging from those in which the commitment to complete the chain is haphazard at best to those in which a relentless progression is set in motion and there is no turning away. A given chain in the continuum can be explained by two factors: the internal state of the organism, and culture.
A cat that has been trained to kill mice does this in a particular and highly predictable way. She sees the mouse, stalks it, pounces at the right point, pins the mouse down, rotates it if necessary, and breaks its neck with a well-directed bite below the base of the skull. However, when the cat is no longer hungry, the chain is altered. The cat will avoid injuring the mouse when pouncing and will play with it instead of dispatching it in the businesslike fashion she uses when she's hungry.6
In man, there are psychological drives that are not as easily sated as a basic drive like hunger. A predatory woman will set her cap for a particular man in highly predictable ways. Once the chase is on, there is little doubt, either, as to the steps she will take or the outcome. Similarly, any mother who has stood by helplessly while arguments between her husband and son escalate from a chance remark to a point where it looks as though the two want to kill each other, knows about this relentless action chain. There is, of course, a situational variable that must be taken into account in all cases. Both father and son will generally be less likely to start something when on their good behavior—in the presence of company, for example. Which type of AC is more relentless and binding—the personality or the culture—is not known. But cultures do seem to vary greatly (just as individuals do) in the extent to which action chains, once started, must be played out.
The Kentucky feud is a case in point; so are the vendettas of southern Italy. The Trukese, who occupy islands in a South Pacific atoll, were captives of a system of vengeful warfare that they were unable either to circumvent or stop until outsiders intervened when the islands were annexed by the Spanish and later the Germans in the nineteenth century. When dealing with both Arabs and people of Spanish heritage (the two are culturally related), one has to be very careful to avoid any action that will push them into a "spite pattern," for once the spite syndrome is entered, there is no relief.7 Logic and persuasion normally fail unless there is strong intervention by a third party. The Arab-Israeli dispute is a perfect illustration of the processes I am describing. What makes it doubly devastating is that neither side seems to realize that a significant portion of their difficulty is cultural.
The degree to which one is committed to complete an action chain is one of the many ways in which cultures vary. In general, high-context cultures, because of the high involvement people have with each other and their highly interreticular, cohesive nature, tend toward high commitment to complete action chains, all of which makes for great caution and often reluctance to begin something, particularly in fields or relationships that are not well known. White Americans and other low-context people, particularly those who deal primarily with word systems, do not ordinarily feel as bound to complete actions regardless of circumstances as some other cultures. Many white Americans will break a chain at the drop of a hat if they don't like the way things are going or if something or someone better comes along. All of this is very unsettling to people brought up with a different set of expectations. Any culture in which commitments are taken lightly or have to be enforced by law is going to have a problem with the stability of its institutions—a situation that can be very unsettling for everyone.
René Spitz,8 the Swiss psychiatrist whose insights have contributed so much to an understanding of man's psyche, published a delightful paper called "The Derailment of Dialogue—Stimulus Overload, Action Cycles, and the Completion Gradient." The reader must not be put off by Spitz's title; it was written for other psychiatrists! What he has to say, however, has a relevance that extends beyond psychiatry and is applicable to each of us. Spitz describes some of the traumatic consequences of broken chains and uncompleted acts.9
Spitz's theory is that if human beings (or other animals) are put in the position of having to cope with the consequences of too many broken chains, they will compensate. The compensations will ultimately become so numerous as to block or prohibit normal behavior. The culmination of this process, he calls "derailment of dialogue," a term that indicates not only words but actions as well. To such derailment, he attributes many of the ills of our overcrowded cities, including juvenile delinquency, sadistic teen-age crimes, neuroses, and psychosis.
Rollo May,10 another psychiatrist and philosopher, discussing the apathy of the United States public following the invasions of Cambodia and Laos, sees four types of apathy as steps in an escalating series, starting with withdrawal from life and culminating in violence.
First, there is "withdrawal from the active world to give time to repair the damage to oneself, and to protect oneself from further damage." This is known to the young as dropping out.
Second, there is the apathy of impotence. American students were apparently going through this stage as a consequence of their inability to influence the Washington juggernaut.
Third, is the apathy of hopelessness and despair of the type experienced by the German people following World War I when they were saddled with an impossible economic burden of war reparations and forced to accept the "war guilt." Such apathy is the type that breeds dictators.
Fourth, man reaches a state of numbness and "unfeelingness." May believes that no human being can exist for long in this final state. He does not merely stagnate: "… the pent-up potentialities turn into morbidity and despair, and eventually into destructive activity… . It develops in him a readiness for wild aggression and violence … without thought of whom he will hit." Many ghetto dwellers in this country evidently had reached this stage when they burned and pillaged their own neighborhoods in the late sixties.
Clearly, May's scheme is somewhat different from Spitz's theories. The two focus on opposite ends of the political spectrum. While Spitz is oriented toward the individual in an interpersonal encounter, May concentrates on the individual's feeling of being powerless to influence the vital factors that control his own life, particularly at the national level. The drive toward responsive government is a basic one stemming from the need to be heard and to influence the outcome of events that control one's very existence. Failure to achieve this goal hits at one of the basic political action chains in men's lives. In his books, May describes what he believes to be the consequences of varying degrees of failure in the democratic process.
The term action chain has been frequently used in my own household for the past few years. I find that my wife, like all monochronic people with strong drives to do well, is particularly sensitive to interruptions. This brings up another point in regard to intercultural relations. While I mentioned earlier that high-context people have a greater commitment to complete action chains than low-context people, I must now amend this statement somewhat. High-context people also tend to be polychronic; that is, they are apt to be involved in a lot of different activities with several different people at any given time, a pattern that characterizes most Mediterranean cultures. Monochronic peoples, in part because of the way they schedule their lives, are more comfortable if they can take up one thing at a time.11 It is the high involvement factor, of course, that produces the greater degree of context. To the low-context, monochronic, one-thing-at-a-time person, polychronic behavior can be almost totally disorganizing in its effect, which is identical in its consequences to overcrowding. Action chains get broken, and nothing is completed. The two systems are like oil and water: they do not mix.
Furthermore, polychronic cultures often place completion of the job in a special category much below the importance of being nice, courteous, considerate, kind, and sociable to other human beings. Remember, polychronic people are much more vulnerable to anger once it gets started. As a consequence, their action chains are built around human relations. To be too obsessional about achieving a work goal at the expense of getting along is considered aggressive, pushy, and disruptive. In effect, two people engaged in the same task, one of them monochronic and the other polychronic, will view the entire process from very different angles and will have not only a different set of objectives but different priorities as well.
Courting, in both man and animals, is a series of interdependent AC's. In man, the chains are both explicit and implicit, but the latter are more binding. Because of my interest in young people in our own culture, I once decided to study the processes whereby young men and women get to know each other on a university campus. A single setting, the library, was selected for study because it was known to be an area that students used to pick each other up. The library was ideally situated to the needs of the study, for there were places where one could observe the process without intruding on it. Two students were assigned the task of observing on a regular schedule between 7 and 10 pm, for a period of six weeks. At first, they observed every night. Later, when the pattern had been recognized, they found that Monday and Tuesday were the most active nights, but regular checks were made at other times. Their report is summarized below.
First, boys preceded girls and staked out their territory, taking every other seat at study tables, leaving opposite seats open. As decoys, books on law, medicine, and business were spread out so that girls could ascertain boys' career interests. Second, thirty-five to forty minutes after the boys were positioned, the girls would show up and make their selections. Third, within fifteen to forty-five minutes of the girl's being seated, the boy would ask a question, make a comment on what she was studying, or ask to borrow something—a pencil, a piece of gum. The female would respond or comply and act pleasant, but no more. Fourth, in forty-five minutes to an hour, a conversation was initiated by the female, which elicited information from the male. At that time, if the female closed her book, leaned back, or stared at the male, he would ask her to go on a study break, where the second phase of getting acquainted began.
The chain could be broken by either party at several points. However, in no case in which the female initiated the first encounter did the couple leave together. Nor did this occur if the female failed to observe the 45-60-minute period between encounters. (Time is no mere convention.) Much more transpired than has been recorded here, such as visual appraisal on the sly and unconscious syncing. What was interesting was that the same paradigm occurred over and over again, week after week. And if the chain was broken, one party would leave and start again the next night. There were those who never caught on, both male and female. These unsuccessful ones constituted our controls. Elsewhere, my students and I have been investigating courtship in the United States, in Barbados, and among the Spanish Americans in New Mexico. As a result of these investigations, we have found that the steps in courtship, once identified, are extraordinarily stable. Courtship is not restricted to couples but is also found in the business and academic worlds when people are being considered for important jobs. The higher the position, the more elaborate the ritual.12 The same pattern occurs when a business decides to purchase a subsidiary or set up a joint venture. I have heard both businessmen and politicians say, without batting an eye, "I would be perfectly willing to jump into bed with them." Spelling out the rules for the courtship progression (AC) is difficult for people, and their ability to be specific varies greatly. Most people can give only the barest outlines. Even after working with students at Northwestern University who had been made aware of unconscious patterning, my assistants and I have found that there are great discrepancies between one group and another. In one study, the boys were able to produce six times as much concrete information on courtship as the girls, just the opposite of what we had predicted. This, of course, is only a single study, and it is very likely that at another time the ratio would be reversed. Nevertheless, in such an important area of life as choosing a mate the process is still safely guarded by being relegated to that part of the consciousness over which people have little or no control.
There is clearly a pattern, but most people rebel at the notion of making it explicit. Like Freud's unconscious, the cultural unconscious is actively hidden and, like Freud's patients, one is forever driven by processes that cannot be examined without outside help.
