Covert Culture and Action Chains

"If I could have found my tongue, I would not have struck him… . I could say it only with a blow."
Billy Budd

Being inarticulate, Billy Budd would have felt it but not said it. It took Melville to put it in words. People avoid verbalizing what they take for granted—their basic modes of interacting with each other. One reason for this is that much of the truly integrative behavior that falls under the rubric of culture is under the control of those parts of the brain that are not concerned with speech. What we are discussing are super gestalts, so important and so centrally located in the scheme of things that they are almost impossible for us to formulate verbally. This is because much behavior is not experienced on the verbal level but on the emotional. I once watched a highly intelligent Pueblo Indian engaged in intercultural education programs struggle and sweat to put into words a problem he and his people were having to cope with. Whenever a white man is put down in the middle of a pueblo, the Indians must cope with his narcissism as expressed by his almost total preoccupation with how he is doing (providing he is well motivated) or how he is being treated (if he is less idealistic). Regardless of motives, behavior of this sort is threatening and disruptive to Pueblo life, because the Indians are just the opposite. Their concern is not with themselves but the group and how the group is faring. The Indians see what we call narcissism in all whites—a trait that goes far beyond and is much more inclusive than self-love and individual differences. Since the Pueblo Indians themselves are not this way, how can they describe what they themselves do not include in their experience? And what does the well-motivated, concerned white man do when he has devoted much of his life to "helping" the Indians only to discover that cultural insight reveals him as a disruptive force in Pueblo life, even though he considers himself an ally? Why hadn't any of his Pueblo friends told him this?
Many of the deeper, more significant features that characterize a given culture may be experienced as threatening when first encountered. The action chain is no exception, because in a culture that prides itself on freedom and individuality, the AC reveals that the actor, instead of being autonomous, is directly and intimately bound up in the behavior of others. Furthermore, people often aggressively preserve the folklore of everyday life. They stubbornly resist the notion that there is anything about themselves that they don't already know. Some of these responses can be traced to extension transference, some to the tremendous power of the grip of culture, and some to the natural resistance on the part of most people to rearranging their thinking. I also suspect that in the United States we are somewhat ambivalent about taking a long, careful look at anything we ourselves are doing. Low-context cultures seem to resist self-examination.
Information on human action chains is therefore scarce. But as people learn more about how the AC functions and begin to look at behavior in this new light, the solutions to problems in intercultural relations wherever they are found (inside or outside our boundaries, between the sexes, in schools, and in business) will begin to be seen in a new light.
In the meantime, there will be those who will want to know, Why bother studying action chains or even thinking about behavior in this way when there is already enough complexity with which to contend? Why? Because people held in the grip of action chains can never be free of them unless they see the AC's for what they are. For instance, a friend built a beautiful country hideaway in an isolated New Mexico village. To his dismay, one of the local busybodies, with thousands of square miles to choose from, also bought land and built a house within hailing distance. The last thing in the world my friend wanted was to become involved with this particular widow, even in a superficial way. Things looked grim indeed until he remembered that they were both originally from New England and, since he was already established in the valley, she could not call on him until he had called on her! He never did. The two lived separate and uninvolved lives in sight of each other until his death, many years later.
Had they known of the work of Emanuel Schlegloff,1 people who have been plagued by indecent phone calls could have discouraged the caller. In analyzing the opening gambits of telephone conversations, Schlegloff discovered that whoever answers the ringing phone is the first to speak. The caller speaks next. The rules are so binding that it is possible to foil the obscene caller by picking up the phone and simply refusing to say hello.
The American is all too familiar with the action chain governing the rules for entertaining friends. How many times have you heard a woman say, "We have had them over twice. Now it's their turn." The chain can be broken by either party.
At a certain point in all AC's, one arrives at a stage at which words are called for. Failure in the use of words short-circuits the chain and frequently leads to violence. This point is illustrated by Melville's2 Billy Budd.
For those of us who come from the northern European tradition, disputes escalate in stages, starting with nonverbal cues and body messages and proceeding to indirection, verbal hints, verbal confrontation, legal action, and finally force, or physical action. The paradigm is basically the same whether it is a household dispute, neighbors quarreling over a boundary, or management and labor locked in a conflict for power. The labor dispute is like a ballet, in which the steps and stages are well known and it is taken for granted that they are known by everyone. The exception is when the culture or the subculture of the two parties is different. Then the fat is in the fire. Incorrect reading of the adumbrative3 (foreshadowing) sequences of an action chain not only deprives the participants of the steps, stages, and way stations that tell them where they are and permit reconsideration and face-saving withdrawal but, what is more serious, leads to meteoric and unpredictable escalation of disputes to a point of no return. In the animal world, outside intervention that short-circuits action chains usually results in vicious, uncontrolled fighting of a type that is ordinarily rare among animals. In man, the same principles apparently hold. One manifestation of a serious psychosis is the omission of important steps in the chain while jumping precipitously to the final stage. Intercultural disputes have this quality also. In any event, short-circuiting of an action chain is likely to be serious. In courtship, it may end up in rape; in disputes, it can go as far as murder. When cultures meet, because the steps are different few people know where they are.
Take the difference between the Anglo-American and the Spanish-American in New Mexico, a relationship I have observed for over half a century. The descendants of the Spanish conquistadors are sensitive to the slightest suggestion of criticism. Confrontations are therefore to be avoided at all costs. In addition, there is obdurate pride, which must be maintained, and for males there is the added burden of "machismo." Like the Arab, the Spanish-American social organization tends to be flat. School children and adults alike who do not belong to the elite tend to avoid competition or any activity that will set them apart from their own group. Their leaders, in contrast, are expected to be forceful and strong and to show that strength.
In Anglo-American disputes, one progresses by steps and stages—from subtle innuendo and coolness (one must be polite) to messages via a third party, to verbal confrontation, then legal action, and finally force—if nothing has worked and the law is on your side. For the Spanish American, another system is used. First there is brooding (May's third stage4) and, since verbal confrontation is to be avoided, the "If I could have found my tongue, I would not have struck him" law is applied. The first inkling that something is wrong is a show of force. Force or action is to the Spanish-American not a step in a chain but a communication in itself. It is designed to get attention. Later, much later in the process, they resort to the courts.
The Spanish-American pattern was illustrated by an acquaintance, a rancher named Chavez, who was telling his sister of trouble he had with an Anglo neighbor. The Anglo, either deliberately or through ignorance, had fenced several hundred acres of Chavez's land. In discussing this with his sister, Chavez said, "I am going to do it 'their' way this time. I'm not going to tear down that fence. Instead, I'm going to tell my lawyer to fix things up." Up to this point, nothing had been communicated to the Anglo rancher that anything was even wrong. Under normal circumstances, his first inkling of trouble would have been when he discovered his fence cut to ribbons and the posts uprooted.5
A more typical Spanish-American reaction is the activities of Reyes Lopes Tijerina, who put up signs laying claim to land, took two state park rangers captive, and raided the Tiera Amarilla courthouse, with tragic consequences. He was signaling for attention to Spanish-American grievances. The Anglo community read it as the last step in a dispute and countered with an arsenal of legal actions.
In attempting to fathom a pattern like this, it is important to keep in mind that several different forces are at work in Spanish-American culture. The first is avoidance at all costs of face-to-face confrontations or unpleasantness with anyone with whom you are working or with whom you have a relationship. Avoidance of unpleasantness can lead to great stress, however. For example, a young Spanish-American boy in Santa Fe was working part time for a hotel cook to whom he was also deeply indebted. One day, he simply failed to turn up, because the hours of his other job had been changed, which resulted in a serious conflict. Rather than having to tell the cook about his problem, he simply left without notice. In another instance, in my own household we once lost a very fine housekeeper because her husband insisted that she come home by 3 P.M. and our hours were nine to four but could have been changed. She could not bring herself to discuss this with my wife, and only indirectly and too late did we learn what the problem was.
Other factors affecting escalation are the incredibly strong ties and loyalties of family and friends in the Spanish-American community. If one person loses his job, the whole family may quit, with the result that disputes have a rather extraordinary interreticulated quality that is difficult for the linear-minded Anglo to sort out. The net effect is for the Spanish-Americans to hold back until they can stand it no longer and then strike out. In the Middle East, where these patterns have their origins, third parties play an important role by intervening in disputes.6 In the American Southwest, the third-party intervention pattern is no longer present (if indeed it ever was), and the results are bitter confrontations.
The Spanish-Americans of New Mexico fall into the high-context, highly involved group, where there is constant monitoring of the individual's emotional state. But low-context Anglos, not being as finely tuned to other people's moment-to-moment moods, are almost inevitably caught off guard. Looking at the Spanish-Americans' actions, Anglos often assume they are dealing with an "end of the rope' phenomenon, while in reality they are in the middle of an action chain. The Anglo overreacts. One Anglo rancher in Tierra Amarilla, a large, poor county in northwestern New Mexico, who has had his fences cut repeatedly over the years, his valuable horse shot, and his house destroyed by fire, is quite naturally livid on the subject of his Spanish neighbors. He doesn't know or care why they feel the way they do for the loss of their lands, or why they act as they do. Both sides are held in a vise-like grip of their own cultural unconscious; both are at a standoff, and all communication is now parataxic. Neither knows how they got into such a miserable mess nor do they know how to disengage with honor. Both the Anglos and the Spanish-Americans are victims of a culturally engendered situational neurosis that will require extensive treatment before it is cured.7
All cultures with which I am familiar follow general ethological principles and have built-in safeguards to prevent disputes from going too far, though such safeguards may not always work. These safeguards apply within the bounds of the culture but, because they are not intellectually understood or made explicit, they seldom function when dealing with outsiders. The European Spanish, having been occupied by the Arabs for over five hundred years, incorporated many Arab culture patterns. It is therefore difficult to understand why the role of the responsible intermediary, so well developed in the Middle East, is not stronger in the Spanish colonial culture of New Mexico. Given the short, rapid escalation of steps so characteristic of high-context cultures, disputes will inevitably become serious unless disinterested outsiders take on the responsible role of a strong and highly committed intermediary. By what process the intermediary role was lost, attenuated, or possibly even failed to be integrated in the Spanish Communities of New Mexico, is not known. New Mexico was the furthermost outpost of Spanish culture in North America and hence peripheral in many respects to the mainstream of that culture. To complicate matters further, the Anglo-Americans came in as conquerors following the Mexican-American War in 1846. They destroyed or failed to provide support for many Spanish institutions. Anglos generally do not understand, in fact distrust, the role of the intermediary and don't know how to use it themselves.
While the evidence collected over the years on dispute escalation between these two cultures is convincing, this is not the whole story. However, most of the suffering and ill will can be traced to a failure to read the adumbrative signs of the escalation process on both sides. In most of life's struggles, there are no villains and no heroes, and no one is to blame, because the nature of the cultural unconscious is such that by definition only a few even know it exists.
In the Far East, we find similar but more serious situations, serious because more is involved and the cultural distances are greater. Once while visiting Tokyo, I was invited to lunch with a Japanese friend atop one of the city's new skyscrapers with all of Tokyo spread out below us. Perhaps the choice of setting was deliberate—I will never know—because my host chose the occasion to give me an overview of some of the sticky points in U.S.-Japanese relations. In his own way—indirect but very clear to me—he said that there were certain things that the Americans had missed in Japanese culture and that these things represented danger points of which Americans were almost totally unaware. We discussed the matter from a variety of angles. My interest in adumbrative behavior made me anxious to know more about how people in Japan know where they are in a relationship at a given moment and how they keep tabs on how things are going.
Again, the high-context rule applies. In face-to-face relations in Japan, amenities and cordialities are maintained, no matter how one is feeling. To show one's anger is tantamount to admitting loss of control (and face), unless, of course, "things have gone too far." There are no adumbrative signs to warn of impending disaster, and Americans, as well as many Europeans, will unconsciously push and push—looking for structure, pattern, and limits. Because they are unfamiliar with the Japanese system, Europeans are almost inevitably destined to go too far.
We could ask ourselves, of course: How are we supposed to know? The answer is: Make haste slowly and make use of the most skillful, subtle interpreter of the culture you can find.
The reader will remember the incident in which I was being moved around in hotels and even from one hotel to another without any warning or word from the management. If I had been using my own cultural system, this could have been taken to mean that they were trying to communicate something to me. Fortunately, in this instance I was only partially influenced by my own culture.
Chinese culture bears certain resemblances to Japanese in regard to adumbrations. In troublesome situations, one acts as though nothing had happened. What makes this possible is the tremendous latitude and great stability of the system. Individuality, minor dissent, and clashes of personality are handled by pretending that they do not exist. If one acknowledges the things that happened, then one must take action, and action is very, very serious. For example, a Chinese father will put up with a lot from his son without ever saying anything, because he knows that the boy must express himself but also that the strength of the family system, rooted as it is in ancestors, will ultimately bring the son around. However, when youth goes rampant, as was the case with the Red Guards, the events are frequently consciously designed beforehand to achieve specific ends. It is difficult to explain and almost impossible for Westerners to understand how others could stand back and ignore what are to us clear-cut signs. How could the Chinese fail to recognize and respond to acts on their own doorstep (Vietnam) at one moment and be so hypersensitive at another? Yet the Chinese will fail to see when we are serious and will not read and interpret correctly the adumbrative signs in our action chains. When one thinks about it, the process we are involved in is extraordinarily risky—brinksmanship without design. There is a danger for all of us, because neither side can accept the reality of the other's unconscious culture. Any time the members of one culture state that there is no subtlety in another (which is a view that many Chinese apparently have of the United States), it is a clear sign that the subtlety has not become manifest in the course of human transactions, because I know of no culture without subtlety.
Clearly, within the confines of a single culture, disputes, as well as the settlement of disputes, follow reasonably well-established patterns. Otherwise there would be chaos. It is difficult, however, for humankind to come to grips with the fact that there are deep cultural differences that must be recognized, made explicit, and dealt with before one can arrive at the underlying human nature we all share. Given the advanced state of weaponry, if man is not to destroy himself he must begin to transcend his own culture. First, the overt, obvious culture—which it is possible to bridge with patience and good will—but second and more important, unconscious culture—which is much more difficult to transcend.
Recognition of the cultural unconscious is a relatively recent development in Western thought, so recent in fact that understanding out-of-awareness cultural processes is rare. Some of my most learned and erudite colleagues reject the notion that there is even anything to discuss in man's unconsciously structured temporal and spatial system. Talking about unconscious culture in concrete terms is a little bit like talking about writing systems for language prior to the development of writing. The reader should ponder a moment on what it would be like to live ten thousand years ago or more, trying to grapple with the analysis of language. Of course there would be those who verbalized freely, yet were completely unaware of the fact that there was a system that regulated their speech. They would be impatient with anyone who said there was a system. How do I know? Because this is what happens when linguists develop writing systems for languages that haven't had them before. (Remember Ferguson's experience with speakers of colloquial Arabic in Chapter 2.)
Another nonverbal system is the way people walk, which communicates status, mood, gender, age, state of health, and ethnic affiliation. As with some speech parts (the mouth, teeth, and nose, which we share with other mammals), the primary purpose of the legs and body is not communication. Yet people can read volumes from how others walk, particularly if they are well known to the observer.
Aided by graduate students and time/motion analyzers, I have been studying people walking and how they communicate by their walk. There is nothing mysterious about the method. Anyone who has patience and perseverance can do the same thing by playing over and over and over, slow and fast, a frame at a time, movies of many different people walking. The actual analysis is somewhat more complicated and quite tedious. Sorting out the crucial structure points even in a basic system like walking is possible only after you have worked at it a long time. This is because there is the simple act of locomotion and then there is something else. Mae West built her career on that something else.
When determining structure, one must divorce oneself from what is happening on the conscious, explicit, "meaning" level. This explains in part why so little is known about the structure of cultural systems. Also, most people have models that explain practically everything. Much that has been learned about the cultural unconscious conflicts with those models. In addition, the normal route taken when the members of two cultures collide is to explain things in political, economic, operational, or personality terms. These are usually present in any situation, but all are modified by culture, which is seldom examined as a factor in human relations. Finally, when an analysis of any given cultural system has been successfully accomplished, there is a strong tendency to apply that system indiscriminately as though all cultures were alike (the missionaries using English syntax to teach Japanese).
Cultural projection always has been a stumbling block on the path to better understanding. Yet progress in getting rid of cultural projection has been slow. For example, one of the great insights into human behavior and thought occurred at the turn of the century, when Franz Boas8 and followers Leonard Bloomfield9 and Edward Sapir10 discovered as they studied American Indian languages that the generalizations about language (up to that time based on Indo-European languages) were not universally applicable. Boas' insight led to the still only partially accepted practice of approaching each culture anew, as though absolutely nothing was known about its structure. This is still a wise practice.
To some people, linguistic examples may sound esoteric and divorced from the practical realities of life. There is no immediate answer to the businessman who says, "I simply do not believe that whether I sell or not overseas is a matter of manners. So what if I'm a little rude—it's price that counts in the marketplace." He's using cultural projection, and a lot of businessmen do think that way, but it will show up on the bottom line eventually. Nothing could be more practical than being aware of the significance of cultural differences.
This was illustrated to me by my son, who has learned the hotel business from the bottom up. Employees can make or break any hotel, and management may never be able to pin down why things went wrong. One of management's worst offenses is failure to know the substance of the many subcultures that go into making a hotel function. For example, in many hotels bellboys have two jobs: first, carrying luggage in and out, for which they are tipped by guests; second, doing things for front-desk management, such as moving guests from one room to another, checking on supplies or forgotten clothing, etc. They are seldom tipped for the second job. For the first, and primary, job, bellboys rotate like taxis waiting at a stand. The "front boy" is the one at the head of the line, and he is the one who is most visible. A common error of hotel managers, since they frequently do not know how the bellboys' system works, is to ask the bellboy who is most visible to do the second type of job, thereby casting him from his head-of-the-line place and upsetting the rotation system.
The situation just described is an intercultural misunderstanding just like the ones that occur between men and women or between accountants and salesmen in the same firm. Usually there is no language barrier, and large components of the major culture are shared by the people involved. When misunderstandings of this type occur, they are usually attributed to personality or political factors and seldom to the fact that there are at least two different systems involved and there is ignorance on both sides! The principal difference between these situations and true interethnic or intercultural transactions is that the areas of ignorance are larger and the ability of the members of the different cultures to describe how their system works is more limited.
Unfortunately, much of anthropology these days is more concerned with what people say than with what they do, i.e., their folklore of culture. Folklore is folklore and should be treated as such. All one can say when studying any aspect of a strange culture is: there is a system; the people who live by the system can tell you very little about the laws that govern the way the system works (they can only tell you if you are using the system correctly or not); there is little relationship between the manifest way in which the system is expressed (the meanings derived from it) and how it is organized; the system is bio-basic—rooted ultimately in the biology and physiology of the organism; the system is widely shared, yet has within it the capability of distinguishing not only between two or more members of a small group but between hundreds of thousands and even millions of members of a given culture.
A first approximation of a definition of such systems would be as follows: The cultural unconscious, those out-of-awareness cultural systems that have as yet to be made explicit, probably outnumber the explicit systems by a factor of one thousand or more. Such systems have various features and dimensions which are governed by the order, selection, and congruence rules.11 These rules apply to the formative and active aspects of communications, discourses, perception (in all modalities), transactions between people, and the action chains by which humans achieve their varied life goals. Significant portions of extension systems still function out of awareness. Much of the formation, development, use, and change processes of these extension systems, therefore, fall within the scope of out-of-awareness culture and not only exert a hidden influence on life but are subject to the same rules and laws. The investigation of out-of-awareness culture can be accomplished only by actual observation of real events in normal settings and contexts. It is not amenable to philosophizing—at least at present. Until notation systems apart from language are developed for culture, it is doubtful that the type of revolution occasioned by the development of writing and mathematics will occur. When this happens, however, there is no way of gauging the effect on human consciousness. Culture is therefore very closely related to if not synonymous with what has been defined as "mind."
This chapter has alluded to the slow progress of Western man along the road to human understanding. There are many reasons for the snail-like progress: our scientists haven't yielded as much usable mind/culture data as we would like, for they have been bound by the restraints of their own culture. In one way or other, our educational institutions lie at the root of both the good and the bad. Education influences mental processes as well as how problems are solved. I'm not referring to the content of education—because that can be changed at will—but the structure of the educational process and how it molds our thought processes. Our educational institutions, having taken the bureaucratic road and attained such gargantuan size, have become set in concrete. They are unchangeable. Chapter 12 gives my reasons for thinking so.
