Imagery and Memory

At what time language developed and how it evolved are not known. What we see is the end product of a long and complex series of evolutionary steps. Along with tool making, language is one of the extension systems that most characterizes human beings—regardless of their stage of economic and political development.
However, the gradual evolution of language was one thing, the realization that language is a system another. The knowledge that man not only talks but has rules for talking (grammars) is taken for granted today. Yet when man first became aware of the fact that he talked, a dramatic revolution was set in motion. Language became detached from man and took on a life of its own; it became a system in its own right. From this came writing and writing systems as well as the ability to play with ideas, logic and philosophies. All these developments followed the principle of extension transference and explain in part why intelligence is so closely connected in men's minds with verbal facility. Possibly because language plays such a prominent part in our lives and because of the ET factor, other intellectual systems have been pushed aside. Our problems in education are exacerbated by educational systems and philosophies that stress verbal facility at the expense of other important parts of man's mind, which are either ignored or downgraded. The result is enormous waste of talent and dreadful damage to an unknown but significant portion of our population.
Beginning with the establishment of schools, intelligence and education have become irrevocably linked in men's minds. People who couldn't make it in schools were thought to be dumb. Their lack of performance was invariably associated with failure to master either word or number systems or both. Yet what do intelligence, verbal skills, and education add up to when we take a hard look at man's past as well as his closest relatives in the animal world, the anthropoid apes, who do not talk?
Intelligence, after all, did not begin with man, nor did the mammalian brain begin with schooling. It evolved over a period of millions of years of problem solving in real, life-and-death struggles. What is more, the folk belief that you can't think unless you can put it into words has yet to be demonstrated. In fact, many examples of nonverbal cerebration in both animals and people refute it. The study of our past can teach us a lot about how our intelligence has evolved from that of animals. For as anyone who has dealt with animals knows, there are smart and less smart members of any species. Jane Goodall reports chimpanzee behavior that reveals a high order of intelligence and insight.
Figan, a young chimpanzee, showed unusual acumen. Goodall and her husband had placed bananas in the trees in such a way that the larger males could not hog them all and the young and the females had a chance at their share. Goliath, a dominant male, was sitting directly under a banana which he had failed to see but which Figan had spotted. Goodall describes what happened:
… after no more than a quick glance from the fruit to Goliath, Figan moved away and sat on the other side of the tent so that he could no longer see the fruit. Fifteen minutes later, when Goliath got up and left, Figan, without a moment's hesitation, went over and collected the banana. Quite obviously he had sized up the whole situation: if he had climbed for the fruit earlier, Goliath most certainly would have snatched it away. If he had remained close to the banana, he would probably have looked at it from time to time. Chimps are very quick to notice and interpret the eye movements of their fellows, and Goliath would possibly, therefore, have seen the fruit himself. And so Figan had not only refrained from instantly gratifying his desire but had also gone away so that he would not "give the game away" by looking at the banana.

There was more:
Commonly when a chimpanzee gets up from a resting group and walks away without hesitation, the others will get up and follow. It does not need to be a high-ranking individual—often a female or a youngster may start such a move. One day when Figan was part of a large group and, in consequence, had not managed to get a couple of bananas for himself, he suddenly got up and walked away. The others trailed after him. Ten minutes later he returned by himself and naturally got his share of bananas. We thought this was coincidence—indeed, it may have been on the first occasion—but after this the same thing happened over and over again: Figan led the group away and returned later for his bananas.1

People who have had firsthand experience with the reasoning capabilities of animals may still be hesitant to apply what they know to educating children, perhaps because humans are placed in one category and animals in another. We have been detached from the rest of life and seldom see ourselves as part of nature. Konrad Lorenz,2 the father of ethology, is an exception. His work and that of others3 show that what we call intelligence is not limited to humans but has its origins in lower life forms. It is widely shared and has played a very prominent part in the survival of many species. For example, the brain-to-body weight ratio (the biologist's basic measure of intelligence) of porpoises and whales is equivalent to that of humans. Porpoises are highly intelligent, but since man has not been able to decode their communication system, there is no way of telling exactly how intelligent they are. Much of what we know of porpoises comes from observations in very limited and stultifying artificial environments. Therefore we have never really been able to observe porpoises long enough and in enough detail in their natural setting to get to know them in the way Goodall knows her chimps. Techniques may never be developed that will make possible years of study of aquatic life in the detail now customary when studying land animals. The problems to be solved are certainly formidable.
Nevertheless, animal studies do show what animals can do without language. And while we have only recently begun to study other animals in their natural state, we are learning more each day. It is not necessary to depend on our still limited knowledge of other life forms. Even more convincing evidence comes from man himself.
Because he was a genius and made so many dramatic contributions to modern physics, the intellectual processes of Albert Einstein came under repeated examination by friends and biographers alike4 who wanted to know how Einstein did it. He performed poorly in school up to and including his graduate years at the Technological Institute in Zurich. According to Einstein, he did not think in words, nor did his important insights come to him in mathematical terms. Instead, he had physical images coupled with visual images that represented complete entities (systems) which then had to be laboriously broken down and translated into mathematics and words. Fortunately, Einstein discovered early that mathematics (an extension system that works independently of words and is centered in a different part of the brain) was a powerful tool not only for expressing his insights but for communicating with other scientists. However, at times, even mathematics was not enough to make his theories stick, for distinguished and renowned scientists such as Planck and Poincare resisted Einstein's ideas in spite of his elegant presentations. Apparently they could accept the mathematics, but there was another part of the brain—an integrative part—that said no. Einstein states, in a letter to his friend Professor Heinrich Zangger, that "Planck is blocked by some undoubtedly false preconceptions… ."5
My own experiences in and out of the academic worlds have forced me to recognize certain things about my own life and the directions it has taken that were in a sense almost predetermined. A low aptitude with words coupled with great curiosity and a practical mind kept me from being swept up and preoccupied with the main stream of philosophical and theoretical anthropology as developed by many of my colleagues. Consequently, I have been involved in a number of projects which brought me into contact with businessmen, lawyers, physicians (mostly psychoanalysts and psychiatrists), diplomats, artists, architects, engineers, designers, and laborers. All have been concerned with the solution of real-life problems.
These experiences, particularly those having to do with teaching and educating, convinced me that people, even within the confines of a single culture, learn in many different ways. In the process of teaching people from many different professions, I have gleaned a good deal that I would not have learned had my career followed more traditional lines.
I do not know what goes into the miracle of learning. I only know that in the United States in recent years we have approached learning ineptly. A teacher can stand on his head and keep students involved, entertained, and interested, but that's hardly the point. Man, the animal with the most highly evolved brain, is above all a learning organism. He is designed to learn. The only questions are: How does he do it? And under what circumstances and settings does he do it best?
So much has been written these days on the subject of education and what is wrong with our schools (much of it both correct and relevant) that one approaches the subject with some trepidation. As an anthropologist, I would naturally look at man in terms of his past, asking myself what kind of an organism he is. How did he get that way? And how does the way in which his sensorium functions affect what happens in a classroom? An unforeseen dividend in my studies of proxemics (man's use of space) was what I learned about man's senses, how he uses them, and what this means in terms of education.
Space and the spatial experience has been the realm of the architect for two millenniums. Architects create both open and closed spaces: cathedrals such as Chartres, Reims, Notre Dame, and the great dome in Florence; squares such as the one at Nancy, San Marco in Venice, and the Piazza della Signoria in Florence. Yet if I had been educated as an architect the chances of my being able to do research, to integrate, and to write a book like The Hidden Dimension would be practically nil. Why? Because I would have been brainwashed by the architectural education, which has a bias in favor of visual aesthetics. Most architects think of the spatial experience as primarily visual. As one of them once explained to me, they also think of it in terms of drawings and renderings that is, two-dimensionally!6 However, behind this relatively simple statement lie some problems of considerable magnitude. One of the talents of architects—the fact that they are great visualizers—separates them from their clients and causes untold pain and agony. Architects can look at a drawing and, using it as a reminder system, reconstruct the spaces quite vividly in their own minds. But few clients have this capacity. Clients have to actually be in the space after it is finished before they can experience it. This may explain some of the disasters that come about in urban planning. The nonarchitects who review the plans do not have the capacity to see what will happen until the high way or the bridge or the building is in place, and by then it is too late.
Chloethiel Woodard Smith, a very gifted architect and friend, has had success in designing for people (as contrasted to designing for other architects). Recognizing the translation problems her colleagues were having, on occasion, she eschewed plans and words and instead put on demonstrations for those involved in a project so they could see what would happen. Considering the placement of a freeway in our nation's capital, she placed chairs strategically on the ground and hired trucks and vans to be parked where the freeway would be. The reality of the high vans accomplished what drawings or words failed to communicate.
The beautiful view of the Potomac was shut off. People develop different sensory modalities either by temperament or training. Many people whose talents and livelihood depend on what is written, live in a paper world and take in little else. In fact, it is difficult to predict what people will perceive or fail to attend. Kevin Lynch, an architect and student of space perception, working at M.I.T. with an English colleague, Don AppIeyard,7 once asked passengers in automobiles driving a selected route on the freeway from Boston to Cambridge to draw at periodic intervals what they saw out the car window. No one drew the automobiles, trucks, or buses. Bridges, underpasses, church steeples, landmarks, yes—but no traffic!
Before working with architects, I had been intimately involved with psychiatrists of the psychoanalytic school, as well as with diplomats. Both are highly verbal and depend for their livelihood and their status on adeptness with spoken and written words. They can take words and translate them into ideas and even emotions. One has to use words well if one wants to communicate with either group. Having become habituated to words after working with these two professions, my first contact with architects came as a shock. It was like working with an entirely new tribe about which I knew nothing. I learned that one had to reach this group via their eyes—with pictures, not words.
The risk one takes in explaining all this is that educators and educational psychologists will jump to the wrong conclusion, because they have known for a long time that, if they augment the spoken word with a visual presentation, communication is improved. The assumption is that the more modalities that are involved in learning, the greater the retention. This approach, however, has implicit in it that all people's central nervous systems are basically the same, and that if they are not, something is the matter. This is not true.
My own deficiencies in this line have taught me a lot. A very low rating on the auditory scale forced me to learn the culture of the word world the hard way. My sister, who was a whiz at words, did exceptionally well in school, but not only because of verbal proficiency. She had an eidetic memory. She could visualize almost anything she had ever seen. During examinations, she carried her crib in her head. She could project any page of text or notebook in her mind's eye and read off what she had written days, weeks, or even months before. My brother, on the other hand, was a near genius with machines and optics but had trouble with words and read only with great difficulty. The educational system washed him down the drain. He experienced considerable misery establishing himself without an education. The miracle is that he was able to succeed in spite of it.
I did not see either of my siblings in a true light until work with architects and product designers opened up a new world for me. One would be hard put to find a less articulate or more gifted and stimulating group. The young designers who attended my classes were deeply involved in how things work. They wanted to know principles and were fully aware of a wide variety of systems. Give them a design problem and they would solve it. How often does it cross one's mind that every single man-made thing was once a design problem and was actually consciously designed? The type on this page. The paper. The book itself. The chair one is sitting on. Pencils. Pens. Paper clips. Pots and pans. Clothes, food containers, labels, radios, televisions, magazines, cities and houses, everything.
Because of the highly developed skills of the advertiser, design in the United States has a two-dimensional visual bias. This bias makes it possible to fool the public and is easy to detect in many items—they look fine but don't work. Either they are roughly textured with sharp edges, or they smell bad, or they sound and feel tinny and shabby. People lie with pictures and renderings, even though we don't call it a lie. Did you ever see an architectural rendering of a building and then compare it to the reality? Talk about misrepresentation! Yet we take this form of distortion for granted because we are in the grip of McLuhan's Gutenberg Revolution and extension transference. Truth is printed on a page; reality is pictures. All of which conditions people to a flat, shallow approach to all sensory inputs. We live in an artificial, and for the most part two-dimensional, fragmented, manipulative world of advertising and propaganda. The medium really is the message, particularly in the United States.
My studies of space—how people experience it and create a model of the spatial world in the central nervous system—forced me to acknowledge the perceptual clichés of my culture. These studies revealed the multisensory character of man's existence. The process is somewhat analogous to going from black-and-white to color or from mono to stereo, but much more dramatic. My world became round and deep and real. Full of smells, tastes, textures, heats, sounds, and muscular sensations. Both vision and sound became much more three-dimensional. My design students helped me to realize that man, like all organisms, must not only respond with each of his senses but must be able to store and retrieve multisensory information as well.
All these experiences, research in how man perceives space, fortuitous life experiences, the need to deal with professional groups, clients, and students who image differently in their brains, created a sufficient impact to jolt me out of the restraining perceptual and conceptual bonds of my own culture.8 I began to ask all my students how they remembered things and how their senses were used in the process of thinking. Most of them of course hadn't the remotest notion of how they thought and remembered, and, as a consequence, they had to go through a long process of self-observation. When they finally did begin to discover something about how their senses were ordered, they invariably jumped to the conclusion that everyone else was just like them, a notion they tenaciously held. One girl with an unusual capacity to visualize insisted that she was in every way exactly like everybody else. This common projection of one's sensory capabilities or lack of them may explain why teachers are frequently impatient with, or unsympathetic to, students who do not have the same sensory capabilities as the teacher. In fact, the degree to which most individuals will tenaciously hold on to the notion that everyone else perceives, thinks, and remembers with the same modalities that he does is remarkable. During a semester-long experiment on proxemics in which advanced students were to teach beginning design students, one pair of students ended the semester with the completely "new" insight that they stored and processed information in very different ways. Each had gone through the frustrating experience of projecting his own sensorium onto the other. One of them finally came to me and said, "I can't get over it! He really is different. I'm a word person and he is almost entirely visual."
In order for students to inventory their sensory capabilities, I asked them to, first, rank their senses in order of their dependence on each sense in a memory capacity; and second, to list what they did with each sense in the way of memory. One highly visual student could look at a map once on a cross-country trip and never have to glance at it from that moment on. Another, an auditory/verbal person, could compose and hold in his head up to twenty typewritten pages of text—about five thousand words. Beyond that, he needed an outline.
Another could go down a long ski slope once and remember the muscular sensations associated with every turn, bend, dip, slope, and mogul. He could practice the entire slope while lying in bed. One girl's color memory was so accurate she didn't have to take swatches to stores, while several young men could hear a tune once and then play it "by ear," even years after a performance. One friend can read music from a sheet and hear it in his head. Later, when he hears a live performance, it frequently is not up to his own imaging. Several of my students have weight problems because they can read recipes and taste the final product, which makes them hungry and they overeat. This suggests that some people with weight problems may not be compensatory eaters so much as they are highly developed in the gustatory sense (an overlooked aspect of weight control). We have one friend who is thin because he simply does not like food. His capacity to image tastes—even good ones—is nil. There are those who can image any smell—perfume, the fragrance of their first date, the dank odor of the vegetable cellar in their grandmother's house, and Christmas turkey in the oven.
Finally, I asked my students to describe what they could do creatively with a given sense. Could their design a house without putting pencil to paper, or could they compose music in their heads without benefit of pen or instrument? Beethoven is reported to have been able to image music so vividly that he could compose for the strings, listen to the results, and then feed in the brasses without reference to extensions such as instruments or a written score. His capacity to image auditorily was such that it was a long time before he knew he was growing deaf. Music, to him, evidently was not a passive thing; while he was composing, he did an incredible amount of thumping, bumping, and stamping around in his room.
Nobelist Max Delbruck, while discussing differences such as these, told me that he had recently returned to an old love, astronomy. He was having difficulty, because his visual memory of star charts which he kept near his telescope was not good enough to cover the short time span involved between looking at the charts and checking the stars in the sky. I would have a similar difficulty with words. Another student of mine has practically no capacity to remember either verbal or visual material unless he can attach it to a muscular (proprioceptive) sensation. This may be why it is helpful for students to write out words that they fail to remember or which they misspell.
A young man in one of my seminars, obviously unusually intelligent, had been labeled as retarded as a child because he did so poorly in school. This was puzzling, because he tested well above the average. After repeated visits to different "experts," his family physician suggested that he might have a perceptual problem. That was all. Yet, with this one slender thread of a clue, the boy started working on his own to overcome his difficulty. He soon discovered that he had an uncanny sense that enabled him to remember anything that happened to his body, even the slightest movement, and that he could associate all other senses to these proprioceptive sensations. Such memory is, of course, very helpful when living outdoors but not so helpful in urban living. (He couldn't even remember his way to school, because the car in which he was driven to school provided no feedback to which his body could respond.) Now he drives a sports car with rigid suspension and has no trouble finding his way—he has a physical memory of the road surface!
Most of my young friends used a combination of the senses and separated the auditory into words and music, which is consistent with what is known about the way in which words and music are stored in the brain. The capacity to image creatively inside the head and not have to lean on the crutches of drawing, written text, or models makes a difference to an architect, who can try out a dozen or more solutions to a design problem and, when he has arrived at one that suits him, make a drawing of it. The time required is of course a fraction of that needed if he had to actually make all those drawings. Eric Hoffer, the workingman philosopher, is successful because he can compose and carry text in his head, edit it while working in the field picking peas, and when he has it in the form that suits him, copy the finished product when he gets home at night. Margaret Mead, the internationally famous anthropologist and a prolific writer, is just the opposite. Discussing these processes, she once commented that she conceptualizes blocks of material in her head but does not compose the actual words; i.e., she doesn't edit in her head.
A good memory is a necessity for writers, but some, like Vladimir Nabokov,9 have remarkably specialized imaging capabilities:
There are two kinds of visual memory: one when you skillfully create an image in the laboratory of your mind, with your eyes open (and then I see Annabel in such general terms as: "honey colored skin" "thin arms" "brown bobbed hair" "long lashes" "big bright mouth"); and the other when you instantly evoke, with shut eyes, on the dark inner side of your eyelids, the objective, absolutely optical replica of a beloved face, a little ghost in natural colors. (p. 13)10

Ex-safecracker Henri Charrière, the author of the remarkable book Papillon,11 was aided in surviving an unheard-of eight years of solitary confinement on Devil's Island by his remarkable capacity to image past events with all his senses. He could walk in the country, breathe the fresh air, smell the flowers, feel the breeze on his face, sit on his mother's soft lap and feel her reassuring caresses. There is no way to imprison such a man. Later, while writing Papillon, these same capacities enabled him to recreate the entire prison experience and simply write down what had happened.
Truman Capote12 has an equally active memory for words and dialogue, which he strengthened and reinforced by training with a tape recorder as a check to be certain that he had not omitted anything. Hemingway was also a word man who attached great importance to getting the right word in the proper context. Mark Twain not only was deeply involved in words but apparently was a good visualizer as well. We know he was an "ear man" because he was sharply critical of James Fenimore Cooper for his sloppy use of words. Twain had an incredible ear for dialogue, and he could also evoke unusually vivid visual images.
In addition to the talents that people are born with, culture has always exerted a dominant influence on memory and thinking. In Iran, for example, schools emphasize verbal memory. Iranian educators do not care how students store and retrieve information just as long as they remember. In earning their living in later life, they must continue to be able to recall great blocks of material even at relatively low organizational levels in the government. The verbal memory system, like many cultural systems, is integrated into the rest of the culture and is felt in all areas of life. Americans who go to Iran frequently lose credibility because they don't appear to "know" anything; that is, they haven't memorized their facts and have to rely on reference material to perform their jobs.
In the eastern-Mediterranean Arab world, children memorize the Koran but they are also given number work, which they practice and play with on their own. The capacity of any street urchin in Beirut to figure exchange rates in his head has never ceased to amaze me.
While working with the Navajo Indians in the early thirties, I found them to have remarkable visual, verbal, and proprioceptive memories. They remembered in incredible detail, using several, if not all, the senses. The Hopi, who were equally gifted, seemed to be more oriented toward words and figures. This gave them an immediate advantage over the Navajos when dealing with the whites.
On Truk, where I did field work immediately following World War II, memory seemed to be oriented toward social transactions, particularly injustices, which apparently were never forgotten.13 The Trukese place great emphasis on education but seem to find a closer match between the Japanese educational system and their own needs than what the United States provided. This suggests that at some time in the future, educational systems will be examined for what they do best rather than be evaluated by some culturebound theory that is supposed to apply to all peoples.
Psychologists have known for a long time that there are differences in imaging capabilities. They have, however, been hesitant to do much about it. It was contrary to the dictates of the culture. For example, a California Institute of Technology psychobiologist, Levy-Agresti, working with split-brain epileptics (the nerves connecting the two hemispheres had been severed), discovered that the right hemisphere, which is the non-speaking hemisphere, was much better at identifying the shapes of unseen objects held in the hands. She "theorized" that some people may be more "picture minded" than "verbal minded"14 Such caution!
It is the rare psychologist who will do what Luria did and invest a significant block of time in the study of a particular gifted individual, even one who had been brain-damaged.15 In other words, we Americans are oriented toward the sensorily homogenized masses—men and women without any particular talent, or if they have talent, that is what is not studied. Consequently, our psychology has not contributed as much to man's knowledge of the range of capabilities of the human species as it should. This is a mistake. Our Einsteins not only lead the way but set things up so that less gifted people can follow. Culture makes the average bright but may also dull the brilliant. Serious and detailed study of the exceptionally gifted is rare, with the exception of symbolizers (words and math). The very fact that they are "not representative" disqualifies them as subjects. Yet, in the few instances in which they have been studied, some important things have been learned about the capabilities of the human sensory apparatus.
One such case is reported by Charles F. Stromeyer III, an M.I.T. psychologist who conducted experiments16 on a young woman who teaches at Harvard. Elizabeth (not her name) has the dual capacity of being able to project a true image of something she has seen and then alter the image—put leaves on a bare tree or a beard on a clean-shaven face. Because psychologists make a distinction between memory and imaging, a distinction that probably shouldn't be made, testing of good visual imagers has been difficult. The psychologists needed to develop a way of testing Elizabeth's imaging capacity without reference to context—always hard to do. To accomplish this end, Stromeyer used computer-generated stereograms. A CGSG is a series of randomly spaced computer-generated dots that will appear solely as dots if viewed normally but will generate a figure in depth when viewed with both eyes through a stereoscope. Elizabeth, because of her remarkable visual memory, was able to combine the two sets of computer-generated dots without using the stereoscope, i.e., look at one with one eye, and later look at the second with the other eye, combining the two images as though she were looking through a stereoscope and thereby actually generate the figures which the two combined images could produce when viewed simultaneously. Elizabeth viewed a 10,000-dot pattern for a minute with one eye, rested ten seconds, and then viewed the second pattern with the other eye. Without benefit of the stereoscope, by combining the remembered image with the one before her she was able to distinguish the letter T "coming towards me." In a later series of experiments the two sessions were separated by a whole day. Twenty-four hours after she looked at the CGSG with her right eye, she was able to see a square floating above the surface when viewing the dots with her left eye. In a double-blind test in which neither the experimenter nor the subject knew the results of the test, Elizabeth was able to reconstruct from memory and fuse two 10,000-dot images separated by a period of three days!17 It would have been possible, of course, to test Elizabeth using old-fashioned stereoscopic postcards, but it would have meant taking her word for the fact that she could generate a three-dimensional view when images for each eye were separated in time. The advantage of the computer-generated dot experiment is that it is impossible to fake.
Elizabeth has an extraordinary capacity to image visually. We do not know how many more are like her and what their distribution in the population is or whether the culture, through the schools, discourages imagers. However, many of my students who had the capacity when young tended to lose it as they got older.
Visual and auditory imaging and memory have been extensively studied using a variety of techniques. However, other forms of memory have been neglected. Good, reliable information on the tactile, proprioceptive, thermal (infrared receptivity and sensing capacities of the skin), interioceptive, and to a lesser degree, olfactory, memory systems is scarce. What could such research reveal? Some people can image smells at will and with them recall memories of past events. A good olfactory memory is essential to pharmacists, chefs, and metallurgists. Yet, American culture places a negative value on both olfaction (witness our preoccupation with deodorants) and touch. Otherwise, manufacturers couldn't get away with producing things that smell so bad. Knowledge of the proprioceptive memory is limited. But to re-experience accurately what the body actually does while performing can be a great asset to dancers, athletes, and musicians. It enables them to correct and improve their techniques in off seasons, to practice without actually being on the field or having the instrument in their hands. There are other facets to body imagery that seem to be even more important, for one of the most important imaging capabilities has to do with the body sense as interpreter of the world. The usefulness of capabilities of this sort was illustrated by the case of an inventor who had made a number of breakthroughs in the design of ultra-high pressure hydraulic valves. The inventor was successful because he was able to imagine in body terms what it would be like to be such a valve holding back all that pressure.18 My friend Buckminster Fuller apparently thinks with his body. He has, in addition, an unusual verbal memory. Both Fuller's and Einstein's experiencing of the laws of nature contain significant elements of the physical. In fact, systems thinking seems to be related to the capacity to experience functions that are apparently related to the somatosensory motor cortex—recall an image in physical terms.19
Additional data on this fascinating subject is described in a volume titled Synectics,20 which covers a series of reports on the creative process as it occurs in actual problem-solving situations. The scientists and engineers who were studied made minute-to-minute records of what was taking place in their minds and bodies while solving real-life problems in their laboratories. Until each had managed to image the problem physically, new solutions were not possible. A scientist would have to imagine what it felt like to be a pendulum or a spring, just as Einstein imagined what it was like to be a photon traveling through space or how it would feel if one were in an elevator that was constantly accelerating and how that individual could or could not determine whether it was gravity or acceleration that was pushing him toward the floor.
Even the most pedestrian of planning is impossible without some capacity to image creatively. Yet there is no common word or phrase in English for the capacity to image realistically and dynamically, to mentally plan and rearrange the furniture.21 The poet, the artist, the writer, the sculptor, the architect, the designer, the hostess, the cook, the seamstress, and the carpenter must all be able to image creatively (each in a different combination of senses), combining the components that go to make up their particular art, in ways they are conscious of before the event. Yet, how little is made of this extraordinary capacity in everyday life!
