Cultural and Primate Bases of Education

There is always an intimate relationship in nature between the form of an organism and its performance. In the absence of knowledge concerning the nature of an organism, it is impossible to properly develop that organism to its greatest potential. This rule applies whether it be animals, man, or one of man's extensions. Most people would consider it a foolish sacrilege to use fine surgical instruments for carpentry, a beautiful Ferrari for a taxicab, Einstein to teach grade-school arithmetic, or Winston Churchill as a magistrate. In nature, this sort of balance between form and function has been worked out to perfection if the animal is to survive. Man—the creator of his own dimension—is still trying to discover what kind of an organism he really is. Knowledge of himself is basic to perfection of his institutions, yet the knowledge that exists and is commonly known is almost entirely composed of folklore. Why haven't we done better? Moved faster? Partly because of culture, partly the complexity. The task of building a foundation of this knowledge is more difficult than for the physical world, because the very tools one uses are a product of the processes under observation. It is almost impossible to find a suitable physical analogue for this problem. Perhaps there is none. Without first mastering culture's unwritten rules, we cannot escape the binding constraints on knowledge of our species which can be seen in all situations and contexts and can be observed wherever human beings interact. Where does one begin such an inquiry?
We could start with any one of the ten basic cultural systems.1 Space and time, two of the most basic systems, have been discussed elsewhere.2 Learning is another such system and, as is characteristic of all basic cultural systems, it is interwoven with all the others. Nothing happens that does not involve or influence learning in some way. How one learns is culturally determined, as is what one learns.
Cultures originating in Europe have "institutionalized" learning, and in the process have managed to produce great affronts to man's basic nature. If we are to reverse this process and if progress is to be made in overcoming the hidden grip of culture, more must be known of man's origins, how he came to be what he is as well as his physiological and biological being. What kind of organism was man before he started to develop the massive institutions we see today? First, last, and always, human beings are primates and share many characteristics with the other primates. All of this is directly related in the deepest, most basic sense to how people learn and should be educated. But what should be done?
One promising formula for recreating education would be to design the education process around what is already known about: how the human nervous system (the part concerned with learning) works, stores, and retrieves information in a variety of sensory modes; man as a primate; the relation of school size to the total experience; and accepting the reality of culture and the necessity of preserving the cultural values of each ethnic group. These four categories of knowledge may seem at first to be quite disparate and unrelated, yet they do seem to hold the key to identifying much that is wrong with education in the United States today.
In considering what kind of organism man is, one inevitably returns to the brain, that incredible, only partially understood organ. It is, after all, very much in the middle of things and has something to do with every aspect of the entire organism. Unfortunately, little of what is currently known about the brain has been of direct use to educators. The connecting links between neurophysiology, neuroanatomy, and psychopharmacology in the everyday world have yet to be forged. There are, however, a few men (all of them different) whose work on the brain or those parts of the brain that are relevant to our discussion is sufficiently comprehensive to provide keystones to the foundation of education for the future. Five men whose work I wish to discuss are: A. R. Luria, K. S. Lashley, K. H. Pribram, Paul Pietsch, and P. D. MacLean. Luria,3 the Russian neurophysiologist, has made careful studies of how the human brain responds when it is traumatized (wounded or injured in any way) as well as how it recovers its functions. Stanford University's Pribram4 works on how monkey brains store and organize sensory information. He follows in the footsteps of Lashley but has traveled farther, while Pietsch,5 a professor at Indiana University, has produced new and impressive evidence on information storage in the brain. MacLean6 has contributed an appreciation of the phylogeny of certain neurological processes. A score of other distinguished scientists have also devoted their lives to the study of the central nervous system, and their work could be translated and applied to various facets of education. However, as of this moment, in order to maintain some semblance of congruity between levels in this book, it is necessary to restrict ourselves primarily to the work of Luria, Lashley, Pribram, Pietsch, and MacLean.
But let us consider for a moment the European preoccupation with the distinction between mind and brain, because this distinction concerns the core issues of this book—man as a cultural organism and man as a biological organism. There has been for some time a practice among scholars to distinguish between mind and brain; brain being the physiological organ, and mind, what man does with that organ. The descriptions that follow were chosen because they specifically exclude mind, yet reveal functions which, while definitely structured, are popularly and erroneously associated with functions of mind. The mind/brain dichotomy in the absence of a suitable theory of culture has proved to be such a slippery and elusive concept that many American practitioners have simply sidestepped the issue.7 Yet the physiological organ is deeply altered by experience. How does one go about describing the brain's program before it has been altered? I propose that this state of affairs is an accident of history (our notions grew out of a basically European tradition), coupled with the artificial separations of psychology and anthropology and produced a concept of mind independent of and divorced from a theory of culture. What has been thought of as mind is actually internalized culture. The mind-culture process which has evolved over the past four or more million years is primarily concerned with "organization" and, furthermore, the organization of ''information'' as it is channeled (and altered by the senses) to the brain.8 Skinner's9 reinforcement schedules determine what is perceived in the world and what is not. The only thing is that life, not Skinner, defines the rewards and punishments as well as the organization, which constitute a transaction between the organism and the environment. The totality—the man-environment transaction including introjects and extensions—is culture. What anthropologists think and say and what people think and say about culture are independent of the process itself and can be termed metaculture. (Most anthropology is concerned with metaculture, but that is another issue, independent of this discussion.)
A view of the brain that has attracted considerable attention in recent years is propounded by P. D. MaoLean.10 MacLean, a physician, has demonstrated that man has not one but three brains and therefore three natures, which may not always be in step with each other. The three are: an old reptilian brain; an old mammalian brain; and a higher and more recent mammalian brain known as the neocortex. The reptilian brain (the brain stem) takes care of the vital functions and also includes such features as space orientation—territoriality and responses to crowding. Between the old brain and the new brain lies the old mammalian brain, called the limbic system.11 The limbic system evolved in response to evolutionary pressures for birds and mammals to live in groups. The limbic system makes it possible to experience emotions—pleasure and pain—and to read significance into the environment. It also plays an important role in refining observations in order to handle increasing environmental complexities such as dominance hierarchies. The third brain—the new brain, or neocortex—lies on top of and surrounds the other brains and has much to do with man's capacity for symbolic behavior.
And while MacLean and Luria (whose work will be discussed later) approach the brain quite differently, what MacLean adds is the notion of depth and age to such activities as the spatial function. He also shows us that social hierarchies, social grouping, and emotion are very basic and that they have been with us for a long time, perhaps a hundred million years. In case this seems too simple, remember that there was not a simple imposition of one primitive brain on another but, rather, a joint evolution as each new brain was added. These functions are integrated, but they sprang from different sources in response to different challenges. The reptilian foundation was laid down somewhere in the neighborhood of half a billion years ago, when reptiles began storing information in their brains for future use. If there is any single aspect or common feature that underlies all education and all learning and all cultures, it is the storage and synthesis of information for future use. How this miracle is accomplished was worked out independently by Paul Pietsch12 and Karl Pribram13 in an impressive series of experiments with salamanders and monkeys.
The dynamic study of memory, however, began with Karl Lashley,14 t.he famous psychologist who spent a lifetime trying to locate memory in the brain. He worked with rats, cutting away sections of the brain to see how much they could remember by testing their performance in solving problems such as running mazes. No matter how much of the cerebrum (the old mammalian brain) he cut away, if there was any left at all, the rats could still remember. It was impossible to excise memory! Some hard-nosed scientists found Lashley's results unbelievable. Like most of us, they wanted everything in its place. However, nothing in life is inherently neat, and answers come from unexpected sources. It wasn't until more than twenty years after Lashley began his research on rats that Dennis Cabot, a physicist at the University of London working with light rays as a means of improving the electron microscope stumbled on the optical hologram, which earned him the 1971 Nobel prize15 and in the process provided a model that helps to explain Lashley's results. The optical hologram is multiple-image storage, or lensless 3-D laserbeam photography. By now, most people have seen or read about holography in the popular press.16 Cut a hologram in half, in quarters, or reduce it to a mere chip; the image remains—just as memory remained in the rat's brain. The image is not as bright, but it is all there.
Stanford's Pribram was the first to build a theory of memory using a holographic model. Like Lashley, he systematically both excises and stimulates different parts of the brain. Instead of rats, he uses monkeys (over one thousand of them so far). Monkeys, of course, are closer to man than rats and salamanders. Pribram's experiments are highly detailed, subtly contrived, and have required as long as seven years for completion. Yet he found it impossible to localize memory,17 over the full range of the phylogenetic scale including animals as primitive as salamanders and as advanced as man.
In 1971, another scientist, Pietsch, walked to the podium and addressed anatomists in Dallas, Texas. The title of his paper was "Scrambled Salamander Brains: A Test of Holographic Theories of Neural Program Storage."18 According to Pietsch, a hologram "… does not capture a thingy thing. It captures rules—a harmonic syllogism . . . mathematics in reverse." The idea, even in the physical world, takes getting used to. Holographers can construct , acoustical holograms and get the original back—not with sound waves but with light in some other form. The same principle enables organisms with brains, particularly man, to shift instantly, if need be, from one sense modality to another. Just as remarkable are the many different images that can be stored on the same holographic plate; i.e., storage in depth. Yet none of this interferes in the slightest with the specialized and localized functions of the brain. Applications of the principles being discussed are not limited to Lashley and his rats or Pribram and his monkeys. According to Pietsch, one can see the evidence of them as far back as Pavlov.
Holographic thinking is in direct conflict with many of the underlying basic assumptions of our culture, as well as with the content and organization of American education. The reader may wonder how holographic theory explains the centers of the brain, where specific functions are localized: rage, fear, hunger, as well as the visual, auditory, and motor areas of the brain. According to Luria, these are processing and contexting stations, not "storage depots"— they act to classify, context, and pump information in and out but not to house it. But, to return to Pietsch:
At first he was skeptical of the entire holographic notion. Lashley's experiments were inconclusive. Pietsch felt that only by shuffling parts of the brain could you test the holographic theory. This he did. In seven hundred operations, he transferred parts of the brain around like a Las Vegas faro dealer. Regardless of the arrangement of their brain, the salamander still sensed the presence of their favorite food, tubifex worms, and ate them. As the theory predicted, scrambling the brain's anatomy did not scramble its programs. In order to test the theory further, he chose the brain of a tadpole (a vegetarian) and grafted it in place of the excised salamander brain. In three months the salamander had eighteen hundred encounters with fresh worms, played with them, but did not eat a single tubifex, because this salamander had been provided with a different program.
Pietsch's, Lashley's, and Pribram's studies go a long way to explain the conservatism, once programmed by culture, not only of individual human beings, but of whole cultures as well. This is why it is difficult to change behavior (once formed) and why changes, when they do occur, require so much time.
Looking at the individual in those rare instances in which he tries to restructure his life, it is a common experience of patients and therapists in psychoanalysis to keep having to go over and over and over the same material. Each time a dynamism is analyzed, it is seen in a slightly different light and from a different point of view, and it sometimes appears as though nothing changes. One reason psychotherapy is frequently so slow is that in order to change one thing it is necessary to alter the entire psyche, because the different parts of the psyche are functionally interrelated. Anthropologists have known for a long time that all aspects of culture are interrelated. They also know that to change one thing is to change everything. In fact, it was this very characteristic of culture that started me working on the ideas, theories, and observations set forth in The Silent Language19—everything is interrelated, interdigitated, reflected in everything else, while overt culture is an extension of both mind and brain. Internalized culture is mind.
The implications for education of both brain holography and how culture works are deep and revolutionary. Good-by, compartmentalization of knowledge. Good-by, subjects presented without reference to context. Good-by, periods, quarters, semesters, and time-slicing. Treatment of education that is systematic (in the true sense and not the perverted sense of the word) and comprehensive will eventually come to pass. Since holography permits the storage of entire systems on separate planes, it may well prove easier when someone has been subject to a scrambled, inconsistent learning experience to simply start over again. Because the brain is also situational, a new, coherent program can be learned without interference from the original, scrambled program. There is deep relevance for cross-cultural and minority education in this knowledge, because each culture can be treated as a separate image stored in one of Gabor's holograms. To mix them is like adding a tadpole's brain to the medulla of a salamander. By mixing programs, you may inhibit the student from doing one thing, without providing the means for his doing something else, which has been pretty much the history of our cross-cultural and interethnic education to date.
A. R. Luria's work deals with specialized brain functions rather than memory which is stored holistically in the brain. By studying the loss of specific functions and the patterning of these losses sustained by thousands of individuals with localized brain lesions, Luria has advanced our understanding of how the brain handles information and how the brain itself is structured to perform certain functions independent of culture. However, before embarking on a description of specialized brain functions as they relate to the educational process, one of Luria's books, which sheds new light on memory, should be considered. No brains or parts of brains were excised or stimulated; instead, a whole man over a generation's span, was studied. Luria's interest in this man was stimulated by the fact that the man had a perfect memory, which raised some interesting questions.
The creative brain is a forgetting mechanism, as we shall see.20 Obsessed as we are with the need to memorize facts (instilled in us in schools), few people realize how important it is to be able to forget. The critical nature of forgetting is developed in The Mind of a Mnemonist,21 the life story of a man who could not forget and remembered everything, and the effect that this had on his life.
Describing his first attempts at testing the mnemonist, Luria writes:
It was of no consequence to him whether the series I gave him contained meaningful words or nonsense syllables, numbers or sounds … verbal or in writing… . I simply had to admit that the capacity of his memory had no distinct limits.

But what kind of a mind did this man have? A visualizer, the mnemonist was excellent at solving problems, because he could create images in his head where other people required blocks and objects and figures. However, even simple reading of a written text was a perplexing and frequently difficult process, because he had to contend with images, often conflicting, irrelevant, and confusing, generated by the printed word. His ability to visualize was too vivid and too literal. There were other problems as well:
Poetry, for example, was the most difficult type of reading for him because it calls on higher synthesizing functions in the brain (one has to grasp the figurative meaning in a context rather than a literal meaning of the word). Abstract ideas meant another round of problems and torment. Words and concepts like "infinity" and "nothing" created insurmountable obstacles in his brain. Each time that he tried to master something new, his vivid memory would interfere just as though he were a cripple.

Here we have a caricature of what the average education tries to produce in the young. If the young can do well what many schools require, the mind that results from this process is one with little experience in creative thinking and solving real-life problems.
Without stating it in so many words, American education assumes a brain that compartmentalizes and localizes knowledge, a stimulus-response organ in which a single stimulus leads to a uniform response. Certainly, this is the way everything is taught. Another hidden assumption (discussed in Chapter 12) is that thinking is possible only when using symbols—words and numbers. Yet, according to Luria, the brain functions in several different ways. Some functions (mostly having to do with the senses), are, in contrast to memory storage, actually localized; others are integrative in character. For example, Luria's studies demonstrate how four closely linked functions (analyzing speech sounds, repeating verbal sounds, naming objects, and writing) are actually found adjacent to each other, in a single part of the brain. Clearly, the way activities are functionally or spatially related in the brain is a subject we should know more about. Given the above clustering of functions, it is possible to see why some people have trouble with spelling in those instances in which the orthography (writing system) bears little or no relation to the spoken language, as is the case in English.
Continuing this line of inquiry, we find the following: The frontal part of the brain, the part where synthesis of thoughts and ideas as well as their expression take place, is concerned in part with five surprisingly different but apparently related activities—perception, body movement, performance of planned action, memorizing, problem solving. Body movement! Who would have thought that body movement was related to problem solving? Can't you just see old Miss Quinby telling Johnny, who is having trouble solving a problem in arithmetic, to stop fidgeting! The full significance of this particular cluster both for education and everyday living has yet to be realized and spelled out. If Luria's work is taken seriously, we come up with a much more active learning situation than most of us ever envisage. He found, for example, that if children were not allowed to vocalize sounds and words when they were learning to write, they made six times the number of spelling errors as a control group that did the vocalizing naturally. (Remember, this is Russian, in which the orthography and the spoken language are not confusing and inconsistent, as they are in English.)
Rhythmic movements of the body, and order (A follows B), are controlled by the same part of the prefrontal brain. Perhaps someday we will be curing dyslexia by having people dance. Coding sounds into phonemes (the structural units of speech) involves still another part of the brain, located both in the occipital (rear) and parietal (side) lobes, which also control spatial relations between the parts of a letter (grapheme) and the ability to put parts together to form a whole. (Capital F is made of three parts: | — —.) Putting the parts together in the proper order (sequencing) is done in the anterior portion of the left hemisphere. The tertiary parts of the parietal-occipital areas are concerned with spatial analysis. Men with this portion of the brain damaged have trouble differentiating between left and right or telling time from the hands of a clock.
The brain, a synthesizing organ, makes possible purposive behavior, intention, and the formulation of programs. Attention and concentration are regulated in a deep, old part of the brain (the brain stem and reticular formation), yet both are linked with synthesizing and concept formation. The question one must ask is: What effect does an educational system have on concept formation when the educational system does not either demand concentration or hold attention?
In the brain and its organization, one finds a model or, rather, a series of models of the mental processes men had to perform in the past which were essential to survival. These models are still relevant to survival in today's complex world. In the normal, alert brain there are, for example, hierarchies of responses that are related directly to input. Weak input plus proper contexting brings weak response, and strong input, strong response. The brain does not shoot a gnat with an elephant gun. Ask yourself how many times a day in the average schoolroom the law of hierarchical responses is violated when the teacher makes mountains out of molehills and vice versa (even the bells would wake the dead).
Frequently, functions that appear to be quite different turn out to be closely related, in the same part of the brain. For example, in the lower-left parietal region are located: orientation in space, which deals with order, a necessity for any type of computing; complexities of grammar; and logic. The implications are mind-boggling. Just take the matter of orientation in space. Consider the effect on young children of designing thousands of school buildings so that they look the same no matter from which angle one approaches, as well as the consequences of school interiors that offer a minimum of orienting cues.22 One colleague of mine was once taken to a new school in a strange neighborhood when he was very young, and couldn't find his way home for lunch because the two sides of the building were exact duplicates of each other and someone shoved him out the wrong door. In another case reported to me, a small boy wouldn't stop crying in school. After weeks of theorizing and prying and probing, it developed that when they finally asked him why, he said that he couldn't find his way to the bathroom!
Or take another, deeper, more significant dimension of this problem. Until quite recently, the English grammar that was taught in the schools bore very little relation to the language as it was used in everyday life. This discrepancy between reality and classroom was because the grammar was based on an outdated and faulty analysis of the language. Descriptive linguists, who really know more than anyone about how the language functions and how it is structured, have been trying for a quarter of a century to update the teaching of English grammar. Only recently have changes based on linguistic science begun to take hold. Again, one must raise a question: If logic and the mastery of the complexities of grammar are functionally interrelated in the brain, what does it do to people when you teach them a grammatical system that has little or no connection with the language they are using, which is taught in spatially ambiguous buildings? Looked at in this light, the pittance devoted to pure research by descriptive linguists (though such research appears to the layman to be all too theoretical) certainly was not wasted. Mixing up the substance of what goes into different steps of the brain's structural hierarchies might explain why it is that common sense is so uncommon!
How does the brain, once damaged, recover its functions? And can we learn anything from this process? Luria discovered that
… training or habituation changes the organization of the brain's activity so that the brain comes to perform accustomed tasks without recourse to the process of analysis. That is to say, the task may invoke a stereotype based on a network of cortical zones quite different from the one that was called on originally when the performance required the help of analytical apparatus.23 (italics added)

What this says is that people can be trained to perform in ways that bypass the natural and analytical capabilities of the brain. Without this capacity, culture and the educational institutions it spawned could not have evolved. It was once said that science is the process that makes it possible to make the average man brilliant. From the point of view of the brain, all three are the same thing: education—science—culture. This capacity of the brain, once trained to perform accustomed tasks without recourse to the process of analysis, is both a blessing and a curse. It saves time and simplifies matters immeasurably but can be a dreadful handicap in times of stress and change. Much of what takes place in our schools, our universities, and our institutions is founded on this bypassing capacity of the brain. In light of the above, it is important, particularly in mass societies, that some means be perfected to allow people to function analytically when their nature seems to predispose them to do so.
The above explains (in part) how the central nervous system stores and retrieves information in a variety of sensory modes, and the relationship of this organization to man's institutions. But what about man as a primate, and the relation of school size to man's primate antecedents? Fortunately, something is known both empirically and scientifically about the influence exerted by size on groups and the effect of size on how the groups perform.
Research with business groups, athletic teams, and even armies around the world has revealed there is an ideal size for a working group. This ideal size is between eight and twelve individuals. This is natural, because man evolved as a primate while living in small groups. There are also a variety of compelling reasons why this particular size range is the most productive and efficient.24 Eight to twelve persons can know each other well enough to maximize their talents. In groups beyond this size the possible combinations of communication between individuals get too complex to handle; people are lumped into categories and begin the process of ceasing to exist as individuals. Tasks that can't be handled by a group of eight to twelve are probably too complex and should be broken down further. Participation and commitment fall off in larger groups: mobility suffers; leadership doesn't develop naturally but is manipulative and political. Professor Roger Barker's25 study of Kansas rural schools is unequivocal on these points. Yet, how many times is the "eight-to-twelve law" violated? Clearly, group size is not everything, but it is significant. We consistently discriminate against all our children and young people when we subject them to massive learning situations. Much, much more could be said on the relationship of group size to how members relate to each other. But what about another important aspect of learning? Man as a primate.
Observations of primate behavior by California's Professor Sherwood Washburn have deep implications for education. Washburn carefully recorded the time spent in the natural state, by different primate groups, on sleeping, looking for food, resting, being social, playing, and the like. Young primates spend most of their time playing—play performs important adaptive and survival functions. Because our culture has not considered play important, studies of this subject are recent. Washbum26 states:
Play is important in the development of all mammals … juvenile monkeys play for years … an investment of thousands of hours of time, energy and emotion… . Play is pleasurable to the young primate, and the joy of almost countless repetitions leads to the attainment of adult skills… . Through play (emotional, repetitious, from within) children prepare for the adult life of their culture. Separation of education from life … is new in the history of primates. In the American school there is no view of adult life… . In schools discipline is substituted for the internal drive to learn … to be a part of culture. Through a profound misunderstanding of primate biology the schools reduce the most intelligent primate to a bored and alienated creature. (italics added)

The failure to understand the significance of play in maturing human beings has had incalculable consequences, because play is not only crucial to learning but (unlike other drives) is its own reward. Following from this, one would assume that one of the greatest faults in modern education is overstructuring, which does not allow for play at every point in the educational process.
Washburn also shows that primates learn primarily from their peers, not from adults. Yet, few schools are organized according to these principles. Large classes force teachers into becoming disciplinarians. In this sense, school life is an excellent preparation for understanding adult bureaucracies: it is designed less for learning than for teaching you who's boss and how bosses behave, and keeping order.
To return to our primate nature, man evolved as an extremely active species, and his need to constantly exercise his body is ever-present and profound. Sitting regimented at desks according to predetermined, fixed schedules is no way to treat a primate capable of running up to a hundred miles in one day. Man is possibly the toughest and most adaptable species in the world, one who has dominated the globe—he can chase and kill any other animal—yet in light of the capacity as well as the need for activity, the way children are treated in schools is sheer madness. Those who can't sit still are stuck with the hyperactive label and treated as anomalies and frequently drugged. (Perhaps it is those who can bring themselves to sit still who are the anomalies—monuments to the tremendous adaptive capabilities of the human species.) Our schools are a vignette of how man, in the development of civilization and its core institutions, has managed to ignore or disregard some of the most compelling aspects of his own nature. But how long can we go on this way? The young today seem to be less inclined to accept these incongruities. Even parents are beginning to look critically at all aspects of education. Unfortunately, few educators are equipped to contribute to new dimensions so badly needed in education.
We have discussed man's primate past as well as the physiological and neurological design of the human organism, which creates a biological base on which all education should rest, but we have said nothing about culture and the fact that education is deeply rooted in culture. In the United States, whites are most typically brought up in some version of the northern European tradition. This makes problems for everyone else, because educators, like the missionaries of the past, practice an unconscious form of cultural imperialism which they impose indiscriminately on others. In certain contexts, the structures of culture and education are synonymous, and we can learn about one by studying the other. I refer not so much to content as to how learning is organized, how it is presented, its setting, the language used, and the people who teach it, the rules by which they play, as well as the institutions themselves. Those features of education that are synonymous with culture are very unlikely to change when the educators start innovating, when they try open and closed classrooms, permissive and non-permissive discipline, fast and slow tracks, reforming curriculum, and the like. This point is crucial, and its importance is frequently overlooked.
For example, the classroom atmosphere of a Navajo school run by Navajos at Rough Rock, in Arizona,27 is totally different from most American classrooms. Small children are much more independent. They are less controlled and regulated. An examination of the minute-to-minute operation of the classroom shows that the pace is slower than in white schools. This description fits my own experiences with Navajos forty years ago.
We in the West are convinced that we have a corner on reality—a pipeline to God—and that the other realities are simply superstitions or distortions brought about by inferior or less developed systems of thought.28 This gives us a "right to free them from ignorance and make them like us." The dazzling success of our technology, as well as our understanding of the physical world, has blinded Europeans and Americans alike to the complexities of their own lives and given them a false sense of superiority over those who have not evolved their mechanical extensions to the same degree. Science is our new religion, and in many instances, like old religions, it has served man well up to a point. But it has been put on a pedestal, and its pronouncements and rituals are commonly taken as dogma.
Certainly, our schools have come in for their share of criticism and, while I do not want to beat a dead horse, there are some points that might be made from the anthropological viewpoint. For example, one hears a lot about the need to motivate students to learn, indicating that the strength of the drive to learn is not generally understood. The fact is that the sexual drive and the learning drive are, if one can measure the relative strength of such disparate urges, very close to each other in the power they exert over men's lives.29 Sex insures the survival of the species; it is not essential to the survival of the individual, whereas learning is absolutely necessary to insure the survival of the individual, and the culture, and the species. It is man's way of growing, maturing, and evolving. Somehow, in the United States we have managed to transform one of the most rewarding of all human activities into a painful, boring, dull, fragmenting, mind-shrinking, soul-shriveling experience.
A key factor in explaining the sad state of American education can be found in overbureaucratization, which is seen in the compulsion to consolidate our public schools into massive factories and to increase to mammoth size our universities even in underpopulated states. The problem with bureaucracies is that they have to work hard and long to keep from substituting self-serving survival and growth for their original primary objective. Few succeed. Bureaucracies have no soul, no memory, and no conscience. If there is a single stumbling block on the road to the future, it is the bureaucracy as we now know it. So far, no one has come up with an answer to bureaucracy except proliferation. The educators have been particularly susceptible to the irresistible pull of the sirens of superorganisation. After all, theirs is the biggest business in the United States.
We have enshrined organization at the expense of the individual, and in so doing have forced the individual into molds that are not appropriate. All this is arbitrary. Organization is arbitrary and therefore can also be changed and adapted to individuals. As to the purposes that lie behind education, much too much emphasis has been placed on monetary success. Too much money has gone into buildings! With a different game plan, the job could have been done for less. Right now, professors and teachers are being used inefficiently because their work is structured too tightly. The guiding philosophy of education has within it the implicit notion and culturally patterned belief that a teacher's job is to transmit a body of knowledge to students. But many people learn better by teaching others, not by listening to professors. As currently organized, most universities are very expensive ways of educating professors. Primates, as we have said, do most of their learning from peers, and man is no exception. In fact, the whole notion of teaching is very recent when viewed against the backdrop of man's past.
Implicit in the U.S. educational pattern are large rewards to the highly articulate and those who can work with figures—little else pays off. Consequently, students are often left stranded, overworked, or eliminated by the system not because they don't have brains and talent, but because their particular skills do not fit this system—a system, incidentally, that was modeled after the Prussian Army by Horace Mann, first commissioner of education in Massachusetts. The system badly needs updating.30 Also, schools at different levels serve different purposes: Up to high school, the idea is to provide everyone an opportunity to "make it" and let nothing interfere with the process. College is for those who have made it and let nothing take that away. Graduate school is to keep both systems going.
The implicit philosophy of most secondary schools is interesting and demonstrates why schools are poor educationally but good agents of society. First, everything must be done according to the clock and the calendar.
Ear-shattering bells, even in universities, remind you not only of every hour but that there is an administration that runs things. Class periods, of course, bear no known relationship to the time required to deal with a given subject, to say nothing of the particular state of the class at the moment the bell rings. (They may be just getting warmed up.) The first lesson the student learns is the culturally important point that schedules are sacred and rule everything.
The second most crucial point is that bureaucracies are for real and are not to be taken lightly. The organization is placed above everything else. Later, and to their regret, many people discover that jobs are just like school except that the teacher has now become the boss, so nothing has really changed.
Third, education is a game in which there are winners and losers, and the game has little relevance to either the outside world or to the subject being studied. How the subject is divided and taught is usually completely arbitrary, without reference to internal consistency.
Four, size is valued. Big schools are considered better than little ones. (They provide more services.) The pressure to consolidate is unending regardless of how much time is spent in buses or the conclusive evidence that smaller schools (six hundred or less) produce happier and more productive, socially conscious, responsible citizens. Barker31 studied the effect of the size of the school on participation in school activities as well as emotional maturity of the students. In small schools, students participated more, it meant more to them, they were more tolerant of others (p. 197), they formed closer, more lasting relationships, were more effective in group processes, could communicate better, performed six times more in responsible positions (only 2 per cent didn't fill responsible positions, as compared with 29 per cent in the large school), they were absent less often, were more dependable, tended to volunteer more often, were more productive, were more articulate, and found their work more meaningful. In other words, the small schools produced better citizens, who tended to be more satisfied with their lives and were more competent in every way.
What is easily missed in all this is that consolidation is not restricted to schools but found on all sides—particularly in business and government. Everything is getting bigger: automobiles, airplanes (747's and 707's), buildings (World Trade Center, Sears Tower, John Hancock Building), and cities. We are living in an age of giants. Yet everything that is known about man's needs points in the other direction. It is like a disease: since everyone has it, we think nothing of it. The problem, of course, is that vulnerability increases with size and it therefore becomes necessary, as Galbraith has pointed out,32 to "manage" the environment, which makes for great rigidity and suppression of the individual as well.
Another guiding principle is that the American system of education is assumed to be the best in the world and equally applicable to all peoples and must therefore be imposed upon them—American Indians, central-city blacks, Puerto Ricans, Spanish-Americans, and Mexican-Americans—without regard to their own culture. Fortunately for all concerned, minorities in the United States are beginning to demand a say in the education of their children. Two of the most notable experiments are the Navajo schools at Rough Rock, Arizona (previously mentioned), and at Ramah, New Mexico. Both have Indian boards of directors and are run by the Indians, both combine traditional Navajo language and culture with a normal "white" curriculum. Both have been savagely attacked not only by the state and by Bureau of Indian Affairs educators, but also by the educational "big guns" in the Midwest and the East.
Educational systems regardless of country or culture have often been exported as complete packages in the past—the French in Syria, Lebanon, and Indo-China, and the Japanese in the mandated territories of the Pacific. Once established and functioning, these systems have proved to be extraordinarily stable and difficult to change. If possible, they are even more resistant to change (in any but superficial ways) than farmers in traditional societies, usually thought to be the most persistent and resisting group in the world. It is this basic inertial stability of education that Illich,33 Holt,34 Herndon,35 Kozol,36 and Hentoff37 have found to be so unmanageable and unwieldy.
To take one's view of man from current folklore—no matter how prestigious the source—can be risky at best and downright foolish at worst. By studying man's past and examining the behavior of related species, it is possible to achieve new insights into the nature of man, such as the fact that he is a playing animal. One of the most important and basic mechanisms for internalizing the patterns needed in later life is play—a discovery that runs counter to much practice and most belief concerning how children learn. Man is not only one of the world's greatest players but he is also a species that evolved with a tremendous capacity for activity. Sitting still in confined places is one of the worst punishments that can be inflicted on the human species. Yet this is what we require of students in school.
In any discussion of education, something must be said about the organ that is being educated (the brain). Not only do different students remember and integrate information with different sensory modalities, but the new information about the brain itself reveals some amazing things about how the whole process of education should be accomplished. It is possible to look forward to a time when the relevance of insightful, integrated, synthesizing studies of both the brain and the mind will make their impact on education. The impact will be revolutionary indeed. The fact that the brain is, among other things, a forgetting organ is seldom recognized in schools. The holographic synthesizing capabilities of the brain explain both culture and why it is so difficult to get people to change once they have internalized a mode of behavior.
Self-awareness and cultural awareness are inseparable, which means that transcending unconscious culture cannot be accomplished without some degree of self-awareness. Used properly, intercultural experiences can be a tremendous eye opener, providing a view of one's self seldom seen under normal conditions at home. Like all opportunities for growth and self-knowledge, the mere thought can be somewhat frightening. Of course, it all depends on how deeply one chooses to go, because opportunities for learning about the cultural self occur at all levels, ranging from the details of pronunciation of language to largely dissociated or poorly developed parts of the personality, the way people move—their tempo and rhythm—the way they use their senses, how close they get to each other and the type of bonds they form, how they show and experience their emotions, their images of what constitute maleness and femaleness, how hierarchical relationships are handled, the flow of information in social systems, the definitions of work and play, how the psyche is organized (the relationship of the id, ego, and superego), where the ego is situated, as well as much more. All are deeply personal and controlled by culture. Such structural features as action chains, situational frames, extensions and how one uses them, all affect each of us very deeply. But not as deeply or as intimately as the way in which culture directs the organization of the psyche, which in turn has a profound effect upon the ways people look at things, behave politically, make decisions, order priorities, organize their lives, and, last but not least, how they think.
