Culture as an Irrational Force

Coping with and explaining irrationality in oneself and others is not easy, for it appears to be an intrinsic part of life. Sadly, irrationality does not yield to logic. This is true to such an extent that one wonders how we ever got this particular pair (logic and irrationality) juxtaposed as though they were polar opposites. The explanation lies in the concept of logic, which is an invention of Western culture dating back to Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.1 "Logic" enables men to examine ideas, concepts, and mental processes by following low-context paradigms.
Having had a number of experiences in my lifetime with cultures as disparate as the Japanese and the Navajo, neither of which finds the Western system of logic effective, convincing, or acceptable as a way of arriving at a decision, I am not at all convinced that there is anything sacred in logic. I find nothing wrong with the mental processes of either culture. Both have highly reliable ways of arriving at correct decisions as well as testing the validity of those decisions. Both use much larger, more inclusive frames than our linear, low-context, logical frames.
The reason man does not experience his true cultural self is that until he experiences another self as valid, he has little basis for validating his own self. A way to experience another group is to understand and accept the way their minds work. This is not easy. In fact, it is extraordinarily difficult, but it is of the essence of cultural understanding. A by-product of such acceptance is a glimpse of the strengths and weaknesses of one's own system. Experience has taught me not to trust logic and certainly not to use my culturally patterned way of thinking to make a point to someone of another culture.
The core of the problem may be that Western philosophies and beliefs are pictures in men's minds as to the nature of what is. Because of extension transference, the pictures are taken for reality when all they are is an idea or explanation. Such pictures and explanations are real in one sense, because they are constructions of the human mind and they tell us a lot about how that mind works as a product of a given culture. But they are not the mind and they are not the real world either. They are, in Poincare's term, "conventions." Such conventions are nevertheless essential models on which some behavior can be basal. If, however, one treats them as reality, they are impossible to transcend or even examine except in their own terms. Also, Western philosophies are restricted to working with words, and if one is to use words wisely and with validity, it is essential to know what the particular word system itself does to man's thought processes. To do this, you must know how language structures thought, as elucidated so clearly by Whorf.2 Further, some way of including context must be found; philosophies can be meaningful only to the people who create them. If they have meaning to others, that meaning is forever altered by both the internal and external contexting these other people bring with them. The ideas and concepts of the Chinese philosopher Confucius mean one thing to the Chinese, something else to Westerners. In these terms, what we conceive as logic is rational only in very limited contexts in the West.
Ultimately, what makes sense (or not) is irrevocably culturally determined and depends heavily on the context in which the evaluation is made. The result is that people in culture-contact situations frequently fail to really understand each other. I would suspect that at least some of the problems encountered in the protracted peace negotiations throughout history could have been traced to matters of this sort.
Years ago, when I was working with the Navajo and the Hopi Indians in Arizona, there were continual struggles and misunderstandings because the cultural gulf separated three systems ( Navajo, Hopi, and white American). None of them made sense to the others. The white Oraibi school principal of the twenties simply could not understand why unused land belonging to clan X at the foot of the mesa lay fallow while members of clans Y and Z walked twenty miles to their fields. Ultimately his meddling in Hopi affairs created such a crisis that he had to leave the reservation while it was straightened out. Deeply eroded Hopi institutions already weakened by repeated encounters with white culture were hanging on the ropes. The school principal's white logic was unconsciously self-serving. It made him feel superior to the Indians, because he would have better sense than to walk twenty miles when one mile would do. What he did not understand was that the "logic" of the Hopi system was based on maintaining the integrity of the system and all the relationships that went with it. To rend the fabric of Hopi social and religious institutions made very little sense. Tilling one's own ancestral fields was a small price to pay for peace—which the Hopi had a hard enough time maintaining without some white government employee stirring things up.
The reasoning that lay behind the white man's sheep-reduction program of the thirties or the earlier extinction of the Navajo horse was unfathomable to the Navajo.3 The whole thing was patently insane from the Navajo point of view. The strait-laced whites were unconsciously deeply threatened by the attachment of the Navajos to their horses and the fun they had racing them. By destroying those beautiful horses, they also destroyed an important part of Navajo life.
One does not have to limit oneself to cultural interfaces to encounter the bizarre, the parataxic, or the insane. Much is inherent in any given culture, particularly when cultures become as complex as in the United States. There are several forms of irrationality, and in listing them one inevitably succeeds in producing something to offend everybody.
Classifying the irrational is not for the purpose of stepping on people's toes but, rather, is an indicator of the relative difficulty to be encountered when confronted with a given type of irrationality. Some types are more difficult to cope with than others, while some are impossible to correct.
Situational irrationality is easier to cope with than neurotic irrationality, which is harder to deal with than cultural irrationality. Perhaps this is because irrationality seldom looks irrational from the inside. Yet the most sane behavior may turn out to be completely nutty if in trying to preserve institutions, the means used results in their downfall. Some forms of the irrational can be traced to overintellectualizing at the expense of the nonverbal. We see this in the seventeenth century thinking of Descartes, who enshrined logic and, by so doing, achieved a dominant place in Western thought. Even on the strictly personal level, all of us have had experiences in which something made sense to one part of our personality and complete nonsense to another. The irrational constitutes a significant portion of normal behavior.4 It is time for Western man to accustom himself to that fact. Instead of denying it in ourselves and others, we should take a healthier attitude and accept that in all men, all institutions, and all cultures, as well as all relationships, there are inevitably things that don't make sense and are counterproductive. At times these elements are insignificant, but at other times they are overwhelming.
There are at least six varieties, situations, or levels in which it is possible to observe the irrational, the nonproductive, the self-defeating, or the counterproductive at work. The classification given here is, of course, a first approximation.
The initial form of irrationality is situational, ranging from impulse buying to the behavior of automobile drivers when traffic is bad. Something in the situation causes people to behave counterproductively. Much of modern technology as well as social-science research is directed toward understanding and correcting situational ills, and much of our faith in this type of research and in technology as well can be traced to situational successes. One example is traffic control on highway approaches to toll gates. Psychologists discovered that stripes painted on the road will slow down oncoming traffic. Wide stripes are used at the beginning of the approach and the stripes become closer together as cars enter the gates. This is very effective in reducing speed.
The second type is contextual irrationality, which comes from the application or projection of the logic of one context onto another. When people get overly technical, applying a classroom system of logic to social conversation, the effect is to stop the flow of conversation dead in its tracks. Contextual irrationality—using logic or rules of one context in the place of another—is a common form of interpersonal manipulation and exploitation popular among intellectuals and academicians.
Neurotic irrationality has been well documented by the psychoanalytic movement. All of us have some aspect of our personality in which our behavior does not contribute either to our personality ideal or to our own welfare. Yet we seem powerless to change. In other aspects of our lives, we may behave quite reasonably. Power, money, property, sex, children, work and play, careers, and violence are a few of the areas in which we have trouble. Neurotic irrationality is ubiquitous and sufficiently difficult to treat so that many psychiatrists and psychoanalysts are inclined to stop looking for the source of human ills once they have dealt with the intrapsychic dimension. There are, however, forces at work in the culture that cause many individuals to behave in what would otherwise be considered an irrational manner. In fact, the British psychoanalyst Laing5 holds that the culture itself is not just neurotic but psychotic and that when people go insane it is a response to the culture. My friend Humphry Osmond, also a psychiatrist, says, "Presumably those people whose culture is repugnant to them are liable to become neurotic, deviant or psychopathic because they are constantly being exposed to something which distresses them."
Bureaucratic and institutional irrationality occur because, of all man's institutions, bureaucracy in all cultures has a tremendous potential to be counterproductive. This drive toward inefficiency may be a direct consequence of blind adherence to procedure, but it also stems from bureaucratic needs for self-preservation, and a vulnerability to pressure groups. The combination is unbeatable. The bureaucracy is as subject to extension transference as any human system I know. Established to serve humankind, the service function is soon forgotten, while bureaucratic functions and survival take over. Each reader will have his own examples: welfare systems that break up homes and create dependence; taxation that hits the poor and robs the middle class of incentives to work; building codes that are wasteful, inefficient, discriminatory, and archaic; hospitals where nurses awaken patients to give them their sleeping pills; dams where none are needed. The list goes on and on. By their very nature, bureaucracies have no conscience, no memory, and no mind. They are seIf-serving, amoral, and live forever. What could be more irrational? Changing them is almost impossible, because they function according to their own rules and bow to no man, not even the President of the United States. Custom, human frailties, and the will to power keep our bureaucracies going. When speaking of bureaucracies I include big business, philanthropic and educational institutions, churches, and government on all levels. Paradoxically, most bureaucracies are staffed largely with conscientious, committed people who are trying to do the right thing, but they are powerless (or feel powerless) to change things. None of which would be so serious if it weren't that these are the very institutions on which we depend to solve all major problems. , Some answer must be found to bureaucracy. It is not social injustice capitalized upon by political leaders that causes revolutions. It is when bureaucracies become so top-heavy and inefficient they are incapable of serving the needs of the people, that governments fall.
Cultural irrationality is deeply entrenched in the lives of all of us, and because of culturally imposed blinders, our view of the world does not normally transcend the limits imposed by our culture. We are in effect stuck with the program culture imposes. Theoretically, a culture in which there was proper adjustment to the environment would be one in which the irrational was at a minimum. At least, this is the fantasy of the West—that there are people somewhere who live simple, straightforward lives, usually in exotic places, who wear no clothes and who are free from sexual and materialistic hangups. At least some cultures wiped out by the technologically advanced nations do appear to have approached such a balance. The Eskimos are frequently cited as having developed a very refined technical and behavioral response to each other as well as to their environment. The early descriptions of Eskimo life would lead one to believe that this was so. Nevertheless, analysis of their myths and dreams recorded while much of their culture was still intact left a deep impression on me and the uneasy feeling that, below the surface, the Eskimo, like most of humankind, was still in the process of trying to adjust his culture to himself. The surface problem in analyzing any culture is that people maintain rather stereotyped pictures of themselves that may not fit the multiple facts, levels, and dimensions of which all cultures are composed.
Today in the United States we are still struggling to throw off the yoke of the Protestant ethic. Our enshrinement of time and the way in which we allow our lives to be fragmented is frightening. The whole process of extension transference is highly irrational. Ethnocentrism is inevitably characterized by irrational elements and, as long as it is widely shared, it is impossible to combat. Individuals sometimes do lose their prejudices, but whole groups are slow to change and in many instances give up one prejudice only to take on another.6 Individual irrationality is thought of as a product of the particular psychodynamics of the person, whereas cultural irrationality is widely shared and therefore often thought to be normal. Our attitudes toward consumption and material goods and our apparent lack of interest in curbing waste at a time when our resources are running out is clearly insane. But because we share the insanity with others and get little help from our institutions or leaders, this insanity goes virtually unchecked in spite of valiant efforts of the environmentalists. After all, you can't stop progress! Or can you?
Understanding man, understanding culture, and understanding the world and unraveling the irrational are inseparable aspects of the same process. Culturally based paradigms place obstacles in the path to understanding because culture equips each of us with built-in blinders, hidden and unstated assumptions that control our thoughts and block the unraveling of cultural processes. Yet, man without culture is not man. One cannot interpret any aspect of culture apart from, and without the co-operation of, the members of a given culture.
Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons (some of them political), it is becoming increasingly difficult in America to work at the interface between cultures. Recently, an unusually perceptive colleague of Spanish descent told me that almost without exception the attempts of social scientists to describe Spanish-American culture, particularly in New Mexico, were "rip-offs"—egregious distortions in which most of the statements made were either wrong or out of context. These statements, he said, gave an Anglo intellectual's view of Spanish-American culture, which is about as relevant as an unmarried uncle's view of how to discipline his sister's children. Since the men and women responsible for these studies are for the most part both well trained in Anglo-American social science methodology and well motivated, one can only assume that there is something basically wrong with the way in which social science research is often conducted.
One source of error seems to lie in two assumptions: that an outsider can, within a matter of months or even years, adequately understand, explain, and describe a foreign culture; and that he can transcend his own culture. These errors in theory and practice were not at first evident to Europeans, who, reinforced by their conviction of superiority and the correctness of their methods, carried their own stereotypes with them and explained everyone else in the world to other Europeans without having to face the people whose lives and institutions they had been describing. Since Europeans shared stereotypes with colleagues and laymen alike, many interpretations of foreign cultures were taken at face value.7 I am not for a moment suggesting or implying that social scientists in the field were neither gifted nor sincere. I am only saying that their own peer groups as well as the public had a view of other people that was characteristic of European cultures.
I used to see these processes at work in the U. S. State Department whenever there was an attempt to get at the reality of another political/cultural system. The careers of distinguished men like John Stewart Service (who knew China so well) ran aground on the reefs of cultural, as well as political, barriers. This did not go unnoticed by less venturesome and less talented foreign service officers. With few exceptions, no matter where one looked, custom and fashion determined what was to be reported to Washington and what was not, to say nothing of what was made public. For the most part, the distortions were not deliberate; they were unconscious.
There is, as far as I know, no way out of the dilemma of the cultural bind. One cannot normally transcend one's culture without first exposing its major hidden axioms and unstated assumptions concerning what life is all about—how it is lived, viewed, analyzed, talked about, described, and changed. Because cultures are wholes, are systematic (composed of interrelated systems in which each aspect is functionally interrelated with all other parts), and are highly contexted as well, it is hard to describe them from the outside. A given culture cannot be understood simply in terms of content or parts. One has to know how the whole system is put together, how the major systems and dynamisms function, and how they are interrelated. This brings us to a remarkable position; namely, that it is not possible to adequately describe a culture solely from the inside or from the outside without reference to the other. Bicultural people and culture-contact situations enhance the opportunity for comparison. Two other situations that expose culture's hidden structure are when one is raising the young and is forced to explain things, and when traditional cultural institutions begin to crumble as they are now doing. The task is far from simple, yet understanding ourselves and the world we have created—and which in turn creates us—is perhaps the single most important task facing humankind today.
